Where Tier 3 Fits in the MTSS Framework
Core Principles of MTSS 

Supporting youth at the Tier 3 level begins with a strong Multi-tiered System of Supports
(MTSS). MTSS is a framework approach that includes a tiered approach to support students
with academic, behavior, and mental health. MTSS includes three tiers of support based on the
level of intensity needed.
Click through the image below for a review of each tier.
Tier 1 

Tier 1 is the universal level of support, meaning that all students are involved. The main goals of Tier 1
support are to:
Provide support for all students
Proactively prevent problems
Some examples of Tier 1 supports are:
School climate enhancement
Schoolwide behavioral expectations
Universal curriculum
When functioning well, Tier 1 ideally meets the needs of around 80% of students.
Tier 2 

Tier 2 involves supplemental and targeted interventions for some students. Goals of Tier 2 support are:
Support select students
Proactively respond to needs before they become greater
Some examples of Tier 2 supports include:
Mentoring programs
Small group instruction
Ideally, Tier 2 supports 10-15% of students.
Tier 3 

At the Tier 3 level, support is given for a few students at the most intensive level, ideally supporting 5-10%
of students. Some goals of Tier 3 support include:
Support students with mental health concerns or challenges
Enable all students to succeed
Some examples of Tier 3 support are:
Individual counseling
Behavior intervention plans
Tier 3 is the main focus of this lesson and this course. Keep going for more information
A well-functioning MTSS proactively identiﬁes needs and matches resources to intentionally
respond to all students. Mental health is not just a focus at Tier 3, but rather a component of the
culture of support across all tiers. As a champion for mental health and positive health and
wellbeing in your buildings, you can inform strategies across all tiers, planting seeds to nurture
a positive and supportive culture in your buildings for all students.
MTSS also includes the following core practices that apply across all tiers:
Data-informed decision making
Team-based approach
Screening
Cultural humility
Family engagement
Let's take a look at each of these in the flashcards below.  ashcards below.
Data-informed decision making 

Data-informed decision making
is the process of using data as a
guide and resource in
determining which students
receive which supports. Data
can come from a variety of
sources: grades, test scores,
attendance records,
assessments, information from
families, teachers observations,
MTSS involves a team-based
approach. MTSS teams include
a diverse range of
professionals, including:
Screening 

MTSS uses screening
assessments to proactively
general and special
identify concerns. Screening is
education teachers
often done for hearing/vision,
school administrators
reading, math, and social,
emotional, and behavioral skills.
mental health clinicians
Screening is a proactive
approach that identifies
students who may be at
elevated risk for outcomes,
Cultural Humility 

Cultural humility is a central
value to core MTSS. Cultural
humility involves valuing and
respecting the beliefs of all
community members. This
includes self-reflection on one's
own perspective and how that
impacts interactions with
others, open-mindedness to
the perspectives of others, and
Family engagement 

Family engagement is also
central to MTSS. Interacting
and collaborating with families
enables their voices to be heard
and supports a stronger
learning environment for
everyone. Strong school-
family-community partnerships
involve two-way and frequent
communication mutual trust
While all of this might sound great to you, you might also be wondering why support youth
mental health through MTSS and in the school setting. After all, mental health providers can
provide care in many settings, such as doctor's offices, hospitals, private practices, or
community organizations. However, there are many advantages to school-based care that is
provided through an MTSS framework. Read more about the advantages of youth accessing
mental health care through schools that practice MTSS in the list below.
Accessibility: 

Research supports the idea that youth are much more likely to access
mental health care in the school setting than in other settings; of students who
access mental health care, 80% do so in schools (National Association for School
Psychologists, 2022). Schools can make meeting logistically simpler than other
settings, where youth would need transportation to an additional office or
treatment center. Schools are also a more familiar environment which can make
students more comfortable.
Team Approaches:

The team-based approach of MTSS allows for a diverse range of
professionals to interact. These diverse perspectives enhance collaboration in
treatment planning and implementation and provide a group of caring personnel to
support youth goals.
Daily interactions: 

Students are in school every day, which can increase the
frequency that providers are able to interact with students, either in or out of
sessions. Opportunities to observe students in the classroom can also be helpful.
Availability of data: 
 
The school setting has many sources of data available for use in
determining mental health needs. Attendance, grades, test scores, assessments
from teachers and families, and other data sources are readily available.
Integration of resources: 

Resources are integrated across multiple tiers of support.
Students do not have to be receiving individual counseling, for example, to access
support for anxiety: schools practicing MTSS also have resources available for
anxiety at the universal (Tier 1) and supplemental (Tier 2) levels, such as curriculum
about identifying and managing anxiety or small group support.
With these core principles and advantages in mind, let's look more in-depth at the focus of this
lesson: Tier 3
Tier 3 

As mentioned previously, Tier 3 is the most intensive level of support and addresses mental
health concerns for students who are experiencing signiﬁcant challenges that may not be
responding to Tier 1 and Tier 2 systems of support. There is a wide range of needs that can be
met with Tier 3 support. Some students may be experiencing a crisis, have persistent behavior
challenges, or have a mental health diagnosis as a part of a school-based evaluation or from a
doctor or mental health service provider.
Some Tier 3 mental health interventions may look similar to those provided at Tier 2, but they
will differ due to the use of:
Extensive or more individualized assessment, since more information is needed for
intervention planning
Higher intensity and frequency of implementation
More individualized service provisions
Service from a mental health practitioner with knowledge and expertise in more
specialized, evidence-based interventions
Review the image below for examples of Tier 3
interventions. Click to enlarge.
Examples of Tier 3 Interventions
When to Utilize Tier 3 Services 

It may be challenging to determine when Tier 3 is needed compared to needs at Tier 1 or Tier 2.
There are several reasons that a student may be identiﬁed as needing Tier 3 support. Tier 3 level
intervention may be recommended when a student is already receiving Tier 2 services but these
strategies are not enough to support the student's needs, the student may have a diagnosed
mental health disorder, or the student may be in crisis. Teachers, family members, and other
adults may also observe behaviors that indicate concern. Some common concerns that may
indicate the need for Tier 3 services are listed in the diagram below.
Click on the image for a larger view.
Examples of externalizing and internalizing behaviors
Students can be connected to Tier 3 through requests for assistance (also sometimes called
referrals). Generally, a request for assistance should be made when a student is presenting with
chronic and severe internalizing/externalizing behaviors in the classroom that are signiﬁcantly
impeding their academic progress. Review the steps below for more information about
requesting assistance.
Request for Assistance Steps
Step 1: Identification   

There are multiple pathways to identiﬁcation of students in need of Tier 3 support. With a strong
MTSS system in place, students might be identiﬁed through Tier 1 universal screening or through
progress monitoring of Tier 2 interventions.
For example, a student has presented with chronic and severe externalizing behaviors in the
classroom, including calling out while others are speaking, leaving the classroom without
permission, wandering the school, and becoming physically aggressive (i.e., throwing items,
turning over desks and chairs) when presented with challenging academic tasks. These behaviors
impede the learning of the student, as well as their classmates. The family has expressed concern
about similar behaviors at home during homework time. Although Tier 2 services in the form of
Check In/Check Out have been implemented, the teacher's observations of the student in class
and documentation of the student's progress indicate the need for a referral for Tier 3 supports. 
Students may also be directly connected to Tier 3 support through being recommended by a
teacher or parent because of ongoing social, emotional, and behavioral issues (e.g., learning
issues, office discipline referrals, suspension, time out of instruction, etc.). When a family
provides the school with documentation of a diagnosis from a community mental health
professional, the MTSS team convenes to review the information and determine next steps.
Step 2: Request for Assistance   

Once needs have been identiﬁed, a request for assistance can be made. This process may look
different for each district, but teams should explore data for the individual student presenting
concerns. Teams can look for what information is already available, such as:
an Individualized Educational Plan (IEP)
previous assessment/screening records (Tier 1 universal screenings or Tier 2 progress
monitoring) 
educator/professional observation data records
academic records
attendance records 
In other words, school teams should utilize all data sources to determine a student s need for Tier
3 support: individual diagnostic information, progress monitoring data, and the broader relevant
pieces of information that were mentioned above (e.g., low attendance, academic struggle).
Information from the family is extremely important along with relevant observations from
different sources such as art and music teachers, coaches, mentors, etc.
Step 3: Conduct Needs Assessment   
 
Step 3 is not so much a step as it is a process. The assessment process begins with the exploration
of student information and previous records. The process then continues with the use of formal
and informal assessment tools, among other necessary components. 
One of the core features of Tier 3 is the use of screening and assessment tools. MTSS teams
typically have a variety of screening data available. This is a great place to start  Once teams
review existing information, the discussion can turn to what questions need to be answered and
how to go about gathering that information. Classroom or school observations, student and
caregiver interviews, teacher input, and additional academic screenings are examples.
If the team has concerns about academic, behavioral, or social/emotional issues that have a
signiﬁcant educational impact for the student, they may refer the student to the school s
intervention team. The intervention team would review the data, and may decide to refer the
student for an IDEA evaluation or a 504 evaluation. Recall that the decision to refer for an IDEA or
504 evaluation comes down to the team s thoughts about the student requiring specialized
instruction (IDEA) or only accommodations (504). Both evaluation processes require written
consent from the parent or guardian to proceed.
Before moving on with this lesson, let's review a few
common myths about when to utilize Tier 3 intervention
services.
It is a myth that students must
have Tier 2 supports in place
before moving into Tier 3. A
student may have already been
receiving Tier 2 services and
showed a significant need for
the addition of Tier 3 supports,
but that is not always the case.
In some cases, students can be
referred directly for Tier 3
It is a common misconception
that to receive Tier 3
interventions, a student must
qualify for special education
services. However, any student
can receive Tier 3 mental health
interventions if there is an
identi ed need, regardless of
whether they also receive
special education services. For
Another myth is that when a
student receives Tier 3
supports, they stop receiving
Tier 2 supports. This isn't true
These supports may continue
as appropriate with a student
who is also receiving intensive
one-on-one Tier 3 services. For
example, a student with
depression may continue
Mental Health Needs in the School Setting 

An Overview of Common Challenges
There is a great need for support at the Tier 3 level. Initially, in earlier MTSS framework
development, it was reported that about 5% of students will need Tier 3 support. However,
ongoing research suggests that the impact of the pandemic and current societal issues have
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced that number. Because of the increase in mental health concerns, the
pandemic, and other societal changes, some estimates put the number of students needing Tier
3 support at up to 20%.
Impact of the Pandemic 

Before the pandemic, a large number of students had mental health needs. Some key statistics
include:
9.8% of youth 3-17 years old have been diagnosed with attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder (Bitsko et al., 2019)
9.4% of youth 3-17 years old have been diagnosed with an anxiety disorder (Bitsko
et al., 2019)
20.9% of youth 12-17 years old have experienced a major depressive episode at
some point in their life
36.7% of high school students have reported feeling persistently sad or hopeless,
and 18.8% have seriously considered attempting suicide
While this was already a large need, the pandemic and the resulting years have also increased
the rate of mental health needs. To explore the impact of the pandemic on youth mental health,
check out the link below.
How the pandemic has impacted teen mental health
3 in 4 parents say COVID-19 has had a negative impact on their teens being able
to interact with friends. 1 in 3 teen girls and 1 in 5 teen boys have experienced
new or worsening anxiety since March 2020. Half of parents have relaxed family
rules to allow their teen more contact with friends.
READ MORE NATIONAL POLL ON CHILDREN'S HEALTH 
All of these factors contribute to the number of students who may need Tier 3 services in the
school setting. Let's break down what these needs are and look like. Previously, we mentioned
externalizing and internalizing behaviors. While any student can exhibit externalizing or
internalizing behaviors, these may indicate common mental health disorders. Common
externalizing disorders include:
Attention-deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 
Behavior and conduct disorders
Substance use disorders
Common internalizing disorders include:
Anxiety disorders
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD)
Depression
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Eating disorders
Let's take a look at how these concerns may show up in the classroom.
Externalizing Disorders
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

ADHD is reported as the most common mental health issue among children and teens in the US
(CDC, 2019). Let's expand or review your knowledge of ADHD and how it may look in the
classroom.
Attention-De cit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
ADHD by the Numbers 

ADHD affects an estimated 5& of all children globally.
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates the rate of
diagnosed ADHD in children has increased by approximately 5% every year since
2011.
According to a national survey of parents in the United States, the estimated
number of children aged 3 17 years ever diagnosed with ADHD, is 9.8% (CDC,
2019). That's approximately 6 million children.
South Carolina exceeds the national average with an estimated 13.8% of school-
aged children diagnosed with ADHD.
Types of ADHD 

There are three subcategories of ADHD, including:
ADHD, predominantly impulsive/hyperactive: This is the least common type.
The student will show signs of hyperactivity and the need to move constantly, as
well as displaying impulsive or disruptive behavior. They may not show signs of
getting distracted or being inattentive.
ADHD, predominantly inattentive: Students with this type of ADHD may not
exhibit signs of hyperactivity or impulsivity. The student may be quiet and
thoughtful but is very easily distracted and has difficulty concentrating.
ADHD, combined: This is the most common type of ADHD. The student will show
both impulsive and hyperactive behavior and struggle to maintain attention.
Comorbid Conditions 

Children and teens with ADHD are more likely to also be diagnosed with other
disorders:
Approximately 50% of children diagnosed with ADHD have a behavior or conduct
problem
3 in 10 children (33%) with ADHD have anxiety
7% of children and teens with ADHD also have depression 
ADHD Summary
With these numbers in mind, you can understand why students diagnosed with ADHD
represent some of the greatest need for Tier 3 mental health services within the
schools. 
Here is a short video scenario describing ADHD symptoms and the impact on a student's
performance.
ADHD: Signs, Symptoms, Solutions
ADHD: Signs, Symptoms, Solutions
Behavior & Conduct Disorders 

Behavior is a huge concern in the school setting, and mental health can have a large impact on
the way that students behave. Beyond normal misbehaviors, however, some mental health
conditions can cause long-lasting difficulties with behavior. In this section, we will examine
two behavior disorders: oppositional deﬁant disorder and conduct disorder.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD)
Most children display oppositional or deﬁant behaviors at one time or another.
Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder (ODD), however, goes beyond the occasional
argumentative, sometimes disobedient behaviors common among children and
teens. ODD involves a long-term pattern of angry, argumentative, and deﬁant
behaviors.
Some symptoms include:
Persistent angry and irritable mood: losing temper, easily annoyed, resentful
Argumentative: frequently argues with adults and authority ﬁgures
Refusal and deﬁance of requests being made
Blaming others for mistakes or failures
Resentful, spiteful, or vindictive thoughts and behavior
Symptoms of ODD often begin around preschool age and are usually present by early
teen years. Symptoms can be extremely disruptive, resulting in difficulties with
family or friendships, suspensions/expulsions from school, and difficulty
maintaining jobs in adolescence/adulthood. The exact causes of ODD are uncertain,
but it may be caused by a combination of genetic or environmental factors. Treatment
for this disorder involves family and individual therapy and skill-building for
behavior. Medications may also be used, especially with comorbid conditions such as
ADHD, anxiety, or depression.
Slide 2
Conduct Disorder 

Another behavior disorder impacting youth is Conduct Disorder (CD). CD involves a
consistent and long-term pattern of behaviors that harm others and difficulties with
empathy and rule-following. This disorder is related to antisocial personality
disorder (ASPD), which is diagnosed in adults. For some, CD in childhood becomes
ASPD in adulthood.
The four broad symptom groups of CD include:
Aggression: bullying, intimidating others, physically ﬁghting, harming animals,
or sexual violence
Destruction: setting ﬁre, vandalizing, or otherwise damaging property
Deceitfulness: lying, stealing, breaking into places
Violations of rules: absences from school, breaking rules set by parents,
teachers, or other authority ﬁgures
Untreated symptoms of conduct disorder can cause major disruptions to everyday life,
relationships with others, and impact academic progress in the school setting. Similar
to ODD, CD can be treated through individual, family, and group talk therapies and
skill-building.
Summary 

Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder and Conduct Disorder are both long-term patterns of
harmful or deﬁant behavior. These disorders both go beyond the occasional
misbehavior or rebellion that is typical of youth and may not respond to typical
methods of discipline. Treatment provided by a professional can help minimize
disruptions of these disorders to everyday life and often involves talk therapy with
individuals as well as parents and families.
Note: our team at the School Behavioral Health Academy recommend avoiding labeling
students with conduct disorder related to the highly pejorative implications of this label
(e.g., CD is closely associated with juvenile delinquency).
Substance Use Disorders
Another externalizing concern that is likely to be seen in the school setting, especially in
adolescents, is substance use. Many teens use substances, but not all have substance use
disorders.
Substance Use Disorders 

Slide 1
Substance Use Disorder (SUD) 
 
Many teens and adolescents begin experimenting with drugs and alcohol. While this
can be a health concern for any teen, this can become especially concerning for those
who develop substance use disorder (SUD). This disorder involves an inability to
control the use of a drug or substance to the extent that it causes impairment in
everyday life. SUD may also be called an addiction. Some examples of substances
associated with SUD include (American Psychiatric Association, 2020):
Alcohol
Tobacco/nicotine - through cigarettes or vaping
Marijuana or hallucinogens, such as LSD
Stimulants, such as cocaine or methamphetamine
Opioid pain killers, such as heroin or codeine (may become Opioid Use Disorder)
People with SUD often have other mental health concerns, such as anxiety or
depression. This may be because there are common risk factors for developing both
conditions, but also because substance use can lead to the symptoms of these
conditions.
Slide 2
Signs of SUD in the School Setting 

Substance use disorder looks different depending on the substance being used and the
severity of the disorder. However, some general signs of substance use may include:
Strong cravings for alcohol, cigarettes, vaping, or other substances
Habituation to a substance - needing more of it to have the same effect
Frequently being drunk or high
Withdrawal when not using a substance
Hiding or selling drugs
Many youth with substance use disorder may hide the condition, especially from
parents or teachers, not only due to stigma for mental health, but also due to concerns
about getting in trouble. Some other signs, aside from seeing students using or
having substances, include:
Missing school
Lower performance in school
No longer seeing the same friends
No longer spending time on previously enjoyed activities
These symptoms could also indicate other mental health conditions, so it is essential
to connect students displaying these signs to a professional to assess their cause.
Summary 

Substance Use Disorder can be extremely disruptive to lives of youth experiencing
them. Intervening and providing support, whether through counseling, inpatient
treatment, or other means of assistance, can vastly improve outcomes for youth with
this condition.
Watch the video below for an overview of substance
use.
Teen Health: Substance Use and Abuse
Teen Health: Substance Use and Abuse
For in-depth information on substance use, particularly with regards to the opioid crisis
and how it impacts our communities, check out our supplemental module, "The Opioid and
Fentanyl Epidemic."
Internalizing Disorders 

Anxiety Disorders 

Anxiety is the second most diagnosed mental health issue among children and teens in the
United States, following ADHD. Click through the slides below to review or grow your
understanding of anxiety disorders
Anxiety
Slide 1
Anxiety by the Numbers 

Anxiety is the second most common mental disorder affecting children and teenagers.
Although the pandemic may have exacerbated mental health needs, current research
shows that anxiety among children and teens has been on the rise for some years.
According to the CDC (2019), 9.4% of children aged 3-17 years (approximately 5.8
million) had been diagnosed with anxiety from 2016-2019.
Slide 2
Types of Anxiety Disorders 

There are several major types of anxiety disorders:
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Panic Disorder
Speciﬁc phobia(s)
Separation Anxiety Disorder
Social Anxiety Disorder
It is imperative for teachers and schools to have a strong understanding of anxiety, in
all its forms, and how it works so that schools can provide effective support and
resources for struggling students.
Slide 3
Symptoms 

There are many types of anxiety disorders, but they all involve persistent, excessive
worrying and fear. Some symptoms include:
rumination and constant worrying about a variety of topics (generalized anxiety
disorder)
stomachaches, headaches, and other unexplained physical symptoms (common
in many anxiety disorders)
fear of judgement in social situations (social anxiety disorders)
intense fear and avoidance of speciﬁc objects, places, or situations (speciﬁc
phobias)
overwhelming fear resulting in rapid breathing, lightheadedness, sense of
impending doom (panic attacks)
signiﬁcant fear or distress when separated from loved ones (separation anxiety)
As you can see, anxiety disorders have a vast array of symptoms and presentations.
Let's look at how these may manifest in the classroom.
Slide 4
Classroom Indicators 

Symptoms of anxiety are not always clear or external, but there may be some signs.
Children with anxiety disorders might:
procrastinate or avoid classwork
make frequent trips to the nurse
stay home from school, arrive late, or leave early frequently
appear quiet and withdrawn
have a hard time making decisions (indecisiveness)
avoid certain situations, like speaking up in class
exhibit perfectionism
You may notice that the signs in this list are also present in students without anxiety
disorders. This is why it is so important to assess students through screeners or
standard assessments to determine the root cause of any presenting behaviors.
Summary 

Anxiety disorders are a broad category of mental health concerns that are extremely
common in youth. Anxiety can come with many symptoms, some of which may be
easier to spot than others. Connecting students to support early can help students
with these disorders tremendously
Take a moment to review this short video about the
impact of anxiety on student academic performance.
Impact of Anxiety on School Performance
Impact of Anxiety on School Performance
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 

Another common disorder experienced in youth is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), with
up to 3% of children having a diagnosis. The mean age of onset for pediatric OCD is between 9
and 11 for boys, and 11 and 13 for girls. While this disorder is common, it can be the most
unnoticed and overlooked as students with the disorder often go to great lengths to hide the
condition. Click through the slides below to learn more about it.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Slide 1
Definition 

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is one of the most commonly misunderstood
mental illnesses. OCD is characterized by intrusive, unwanted thoughts (obsessions)
and attempts to relieve these unwanted thoughts through repetitive routines and
rituals (compulsions). These thoughts and behaviors can cause signiﬁcant distress,
anxiety, shame, and guilt which interferes with socializing, academics, and overall
daily functioning.
Slide 2
Obsessions 
 
While OCD stereotypes involve someone who is clean and organized, this is far from
the reality of the condition. Obsessions and compulsions may involve cleanliness and
fear of contamination, but can also include:
Unwanted thoughts of violence
Fear of accidentally harming someone
Fear of having a certain disease
Perfectionism (fear of making a mistake)
Fear of contamination
These are some common obsessions; however, obsessions vary greatly and can
change topic over time.
Slide 3
Compulsions 

In OCD, obsessions are accompanied by compulsions. Some common compulsions
that may show up in the classroom include:
Telling, asking, or seeking reassurance
Rereading, rewriting, excessive erasing, or throwing paper out
Procrastination
Frequent trips to use the bathroom or see the nurse
Avoidance of certain places, people, situations, or objects
Adjusting desk, contents of desk, locker or backpack, or other items in the
classroom
Repeatedly doing the same thing (by number or a  just right  feeling)
While this list describes some common compulsions, there are many others, and they
may change and vary over time. Importantly, compulsions can also occur mentally
and not involve any external objects or obvious signs.
Summary 

Symptoms of OCD are not always obvious. There is a great deal of guilt and shame that
can come from OCD, so it is important to listen to students empathetically when
discussing this condition. Avoiding stereotypes (phrases like "You're so clean  You
must have OCD" or "I'm so OCD about having my house clean") is also important in
increasing awareness and understanding of this condition.
Depression 

Many children and teens have times when they are sad or down. Sadness is an expected part of
growing up. However, intense, excessive unhappiness may be a sign of depression. Click
through the slides below for more information and signs of depression.
Depression
Slide 1
Defining Depression 

Depression is an extremely common mood disorder that impacts people of all ages.
Among youth aged 12-17 in the United States, 15% reported having experienced at
least one major depressive episode in the past year (Mental Health America, 2022).
Depression is also prevalent in youth under 12, and it often goes untreated, making it
more likely to persist into adulthood.
Depression can manifest in different ways. It is characterized by persistent sadness
and low mood, but goes beyond this. Depression also causes hopelessness, low self-
esteem, guilt or shame, loss of interest in activities that were previously enjoyed, or
feeling emotionally numb. Depression can also lead to self-harm or suicidal thoughts
and actions.
Slide 2
Symptoms 

As an internalizing disorder, the symptoms of depression are not always obvious to
outside observers. Examples of behaviors that may indicate depression include:
Feeling sad, hopeless, or irritable a lot of the time
Not wanting to participate in usual activities
Tardiness, missing classes, or staying home from school
Showing changes in energy   being tired and sluggish or tense and restless a lot
of the time
Higher or lower appetite than usual
Signiﬁcant weight loss or weight gain
Sleeping more or less than usual
Having a hard time paying attention
Low self-esteem or being overly critical of themselves
Showing self-injury and self-destructive behavior
Thoughts of death, dying, suicide or suicide attempts
When looking for symptoms of depression, it is important to look for changes in
behavior. For example, a normal amount of energy and participation may vary from
student to student, but when there is a decrease in participation and an increase in
shyness/withdrawal, that may indicate concern.
Slide 3
Treating Depression 

Depression, while common and challenging, is also very treatable. Depression can be
treated with talk therapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), medication,
lifestyle changes (such as diet and exercise) or a combination of these. Intervening
early is key and can prevent progression of depressive symptoms, reduce the
likelihood of suicidal thoughts and behaviors, and improve wellbeing.
Summary 

Many youth will go through depression during their time in school. While this
condition can be challenging and isolating, there is hope and many effective
treatments are available. Providing intervention early and being a positive and
supportive presence can help youth recover from experiences with depression.
Watch the video below from the World Health
Organization (WHO) for a lived perspective of
depression and its impact on everyday life.
I had a black dog, his name was depression
I had a black dog, his name was depression
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Teddy bear covering eyes, surrounded by colorful blocks
Many children in school today are going through trauma of one sort or another. It is essential to
consider how trauma can impact a child s brain functioning. Trauma-induced changes to the
brain can result in varying degrees of cognitive impairment and emotional dysregulation that
can lead to severe problems, including difficulty with attention and focus, learning disabilities,
low self-esteem, and impaired social skills. Trauma can also lead to post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). Read more about PTSD below.
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
Slide 1
Defining PTSD 

Post-traumatic stress disorder is a very common mental health concern that is a long-
term response to a traumatic event. Some traumatic events that may cause PTSD are
adverse childhood experiences (ACEs). For more information about ACEs, keep going
with this lesson
Slide 2
Symptoms 

Symptoms of PTSD can vary from person to person and take many different forms.
Some symptoms are visible behaviors, but many are internal. Symptoms of PTSD in
youth include:
Difficulty sleeping, nightmares related to the traumatic event
difficulty sleeping, nightmares related to the traumatic eventff
Becoming upset and avoiding reminders of the event (places, people, or
situations)
Ongoing and persistent fear or sadness
Irritability or anger
Frequent memories/ﬂashbacks to the event, feeling as though it is still
happening
Being easily startled or frequently on high alert
Difficulty concentrating, being more withdrawn than usual
Guilt, shame, or low self-esteem
Symptoms of PTSD may also look like symptoms of anxiety, depression, or ADHD
(difficulty sleeping, concentrating, having persistent fear/worry/sadness, low self-
esteem, and more). However, with PTSD, these behaviors can be linked back to a
traumatizing event. Assessment by a qualiﬁed professional is essential in separating
PTSD from other mental health concerns.
Summary 

A large number of youth experience trauma and face  difficulties afterwards. Persistent
difficulties may indicate PTSD. It is important to monitor students for symptoms and
connect them to support as soon as possible. Treatment for PTSD may include
individual therapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, and/or medication to
manage symptoms. With the right support, resilience and recovery are possible.
PTSD may be related to students  adverse childhood experiences (ACEs). ACEs are potentially
traumatic events that happen before students reach the age of 18 and can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence
youth and adolescents' mental health, physical health, and overall well-being. ACEs cover
various childhood experiences including abuse, neglect, and household difficulties.
Importantly, not all students who have experienced ACEs or other trauma will develop PTSD, but
it does increase the risk of PTSD and other mental and physical health disorders.
Please visit the chart below to learn more about what is
included in each type of ACEs. Click to enlarge.
Table showing types of ACEs
Eating Disorders 

Another common mental health concern that can show up in the school setting is disordered
eating. Like many mental health disorders discussed, eating disorders have also had a history of
misunderstanding and misconceptions. Let's review some of the common types of eating
disorders, their symptoms, and treatments.
Eating Disorders
Slide 1
Defining Eating Disorders 

Eating disorders are very common, especially in teenagers. While stereotypes
associated with eating disorders include adolescent girls, especially from a uent
backgrounds or who are very thin and athletic, eating disorders are common across all
genders and backgrounds. Diagnosed eating disorders are more common in girls and
women, but they are also present in boys and men, and they are present in all
ethnicities and all economic backgrounds.
Importantly, eating disorders are not a choice and are not just about food or body
image, but are rather caused by a complex interaction of biological, psychological,
and environmental factors. Eating disorders also commonly occur in families and may
have a genetic component, and frequently occur with other mental health concerns,
such as anxiety, depression, or substance use.
Slide 2
Symptoms 

There are subtypes of eating disorders, but general symptoms to look out for include:
Negative body image or low self-esteem; self-esteem that is tied to
weight/appearance
Fasting, restricted food intake, or excessive food intake in a short time frame
(binges)
Excessive exercising
Misuse of laxatives or diuretics
Anxiety and depression - either present before the onset of the eating disorder,
or caused by malnutrition from the disorder
Low body weight (being underweight)
Guilt and shame around eating; eating in secret
Now that we know general symptoms, let's take a look at some of the subtypes you
may see.
Slide 3
Subtypes 

Some subtypes of eating disorders include:
Anorexia Nervosa: 

Characterized by excessive exercise/severely restricted eating,
concern with weight loss and thinness, and a low body weight (underweight).
Bulimia Nervosa: 

Characterized by eating much larger amounts of food than
usual in a short time span (binge eating) followed by compensatory or "purging"
behaviors, such as self-induced vomiting, use of laxatives or diuretics, fasting,
or excessive exercise. People with bulimia are typically a normal/healthy weight.
Binge-eating Disorder: 

Characterized by binge eating similar to bulimia, but
without compensatory behaviors. Binge eating is often associated with a large
amount of guilt and shame and may happen in secret. People with binge-eating
disorder may be a normal weight or overweight/obese.
Avoidant Restrictive Food Intake Disorder (ARFID): 

This disorder involves difficulties with eating enough food, but without underlying concerns about
body image. People with ARFID may avoid eating due to anxiety about food (such
as a fear of choking or getting sick), losing interest in eating, or dislike for
textures, taste, or smell. This avoidance of food leads to nutritional deﬁciencies
and extreme weight loss.
Other Eating Disorders: 

Some people may have eating disorders that do not
cleanly ﬁt these categories. For example, many youth may have symptoms of
anorexia, such as severe restriction of food intake, excessive exercise, and
negative body image, but still have a normal weight.
Slide 4
Treatment 

When left untreated, eating disorders are one of the most dangerous types of mental
health disorders and have the highest mortality rate of many mental illnesses. Eating
disorders are extremely disruptive to health and wellbeing and can cause:
Nutritional deﬁciencies
Being underweight
Disrupted bowel movements, such as constipation or diarrhea
Irregular or absent menstrual cycles in girls
Fainting, dizziness, or lightheadedness
Muscle weakness
Other health problems
While eating disorders are very concerning, there are also many treatments available.
Eating disorders can be treated by multidisciplinary teams: addressing weight and
nutritional deﬁciencies may be needed by a nutritionist or doctor, psychiatrists may
diagnose comorbid conditions (such as anxiety/depression) and prescribe
medications, and counselors may provide individual or family therapies. Treatment
can be provided in residential treatment facilities or in outpatient settings, such as
community mental health offices or schools.
Summary 

There are various types of eating disorders that can show up in many students, most
often in adolescence but sometimes before then. Some signs to look out for are
restricted eating, concern with body image, low energy or muscle weakness, drastic
weight changes, and symptoms of anxiety and depression. Eating disorders can be
very dangerous if left untreated, so connecting youth exhibiting symptoms with
support is essential.
Let's review the lesson. 

Tier 3 is the most intensive level of MTSS. It can be used to provide signiﬁcant
support to youth with mental health needs. There are many advantages to
supporting youth mental health in the school setting, including the ease of access
that students have to care and the use of MTSS.
Mental health needs are common in the school setting and have increased since the
pandemic. Up to 20% of youth in schools may need access to mental health
services.
There are many mental health needs that may show up in the school setting that
can be internalizing or externalizing.
Externalizing disorders tend to have overt, observable behaviors and include ADHD,
behavior/conduct disorders, and substance use disorder. Internalizing disorders
are more self-directed, with fewer outward behaviors, and include anxiety,
depression, OCD, PTSD, and eating disorders.
Mental health conditions are largely treatable, and everyone in the school setting
can contribute to providing support and empathy to students in their time of need.
Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance


@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance
Outcomes: 

1. Explore the concept of the therapeutic alliance and recognize its importance
2. Review best practices for building therapeutic alliances
3. Understand the therapeutic alliance within the school setting
4. Apply cultural responsiveness in the therapeutic alliance
5. Analyze assessment measures related to the therapeutic alliance
Insights into the Therapeutic Alliance
Building Strong Relationships
One of the most critical factors in successful treatment is the therapeutic alliance. The
therapeutic alliance refers to the relationship between an individual and their mental health
provider. The therapeutic alliance is not speciﬁc to any disorder, intervention, or treatment type
 it is a universal component of therapy across all treatment modalities and interventions. A
successful therapeutic alliance can make a signiﬁcant difference in treatment outcomes.     
...the therapeutic relationship is as powerful, if not more powerful, than the
particular treatment method a therapist is using.
John C. Norcross, PhD, ABPP, Chair of the American Psychological Association Task Force
Core Values That Foster a Strong Therapeutic Alliance
Therapeutic alliances are built from the very beginning of treatment and are part of an ongoing
and continuously evolving process. There are many ways to have a successful therapeutic
alliance, and many factors affect it. This means that the therapeutic alliance may look different
for everyone who comes to treatment.
While there are many ways to build a therapeutic alliance, there are some core values that are
generally beneﬁcial across the board. If you took our  All Hands on Deck  course, you may
already be familiar with Carl Rogers  work. He is a key founder in the ﬁeld of humanistic
psychology, especially in terms of personality development. He made signiﬁcant contributions
to the ﬁeld by highlighting the importance of a collaborative therapeutic relationship. Rogers
described the key features of the clinician that support the development of this trusting
relationship: genuineness, empathy, and unconditional positive regard.
Let's do a quick review of these fundamental values. Flip
each card.
Genuineness: 

the quality of being honest and
sincere     
Empathy: 

understanding and relating to
another person s feelings and
imagining their experiences; goes
beyond sympathy
Unconditional Positive Regard: 

approaching relationships and
interactions with a non-judgmental
attitude, respect for the other
person's lived experiences, and the
belief that they are doing the best
they can
To build strong positive relationships with students and their families, it is essential to
consistently prioritize these core values and interactions. 
In my early professional years, I was asking the question: How can I treat, or
cure, or change this person? Now I would phrase the question in this way: How
can I provide a relationship which this person may use for his own personal
growth?
- Carl Rogers, American Psychologist
American Psychologist, Edward Bordin, offered a broad theory of the therapeutic alliance in
1979. Like Carl Rogers, Bordin viewed a collaborative and trusting relationship as a critical factor
in client change.
Click through the list  below to explore Edward Bordin's
Three-Component Model of the Therapeutic Alliance.
In Bordin s theory, strong bonds have bidirectional positive regard and confidence: providers believe in
the individual s innate goodness, strengths and attributes and their ability to heal. Meanwhile, the
individual receiving treatment believes in the clinician s expertise, compassion, support, and ability to
help them. This is where the values of unconditional positive regard, empathy, and genuineness can come
into play. These core values help facilitate strong, meaningful bonds. 
Goals are the mutually identified objectives achieved through therapy. For example, a goal for a student
with social anxiety may be to increase their comfort in social interactions.
It is important to establish these goals during the treatment planning process with agreement from both
parties, though these goals can be modified with feedback throughout treatment. Goals that the student is
not interested in, or that feel like too much, can make treatment a more difficult experience and damage
the relationship. More information about forming goals will be in our Treatment Planning lession.
Tasks are strategies used to help meet goals.
For example, a student with social anxiety may be trying to meet the goal of increasing comfort in social
interaction. A task for this goal may be to try raising their hand in class five times per week.
Like goals, a mutual agreement on tasks is key. A way to achieve this buy-in is to emphasize the value of
the tasks toward goal achievement. If you are met with resistance, try a "foot-in-the-door" technique.  As
in the example above, if you requested a hand raise five times per week yet are met with resistance, you
can meet in the middle with a hand raise three times per week. It can damage your relationship with
students if they are asked to do activities in or outside of treatment that seem too overwhelming. Having
open and two-way communication helps facilitate agreement on tasks. 
Take a moment and think about relationships that you ﬁnd to be especially
helpful and supportive, such as professionals you've worked with or family and
friends.
What are some characteristics of these relationships that you appreciate the most?
Great job reﬂecting  it's helpful to connect this discussion back to your own experiences. From
this lens, let's consider the perspective of students receiving therapeutic support. it's important
to remember that students have certain preferences and expectations. 
Let's take a look what students have to say about the
therapeutic relationship.
Gibson, et al. (2015) surveyed adolescents about their perception of therapy as a resource and
what they wanted most out of the experience. Some common responses were: 
Having agency/control: During adolescence, students are building their identities
and want to have agency and control over decisions that are made about their care.
Collaboration is key here decisions should be made together, with adolescent
feedback and input given consideration.     
Talking freely and being listened to non-judgmentally: Adolescents wanted to feel
safe and supported in the therapeutic relationship. Core values of empathy and
unconditional positive regard can help students feel comfortable sharing in the
therapy setting. 
Friendships over professional relationships: While clinicians do have a
professional role to play, adolescents preferred the relationship to be more like a
friendship. Again, this helps to make the relationship more comfortable and better
facilitates the ability to share and connect on a deeper level.
Accessible and ﬂexible service delivery: Adolescents were more satisﬁed with the
therapeutic relationship when they received services in a way that worked best for
them. Some adolescents are more comfortable utilizing technology to participate in
therapy through tele-mental health platforms, such as video calls or phone calls,
rather than traditional in-person services. You ll review more on telemental health
in an upcoming lesson  Having the ﬂexibility to meet the unique needs of different
students is a key skill in building successful relationships and treatments.     
Gibson and his colleagues' research highlights the invaluable insights of students regarding
their therapeutic needs and preferences. It is important to recognize the signiﬁcance of agency,
empathetic listening, friendship-like bonds, and ﬂexible service delivery in creating meaningful
therapeutic connections with students. By embracing these principles, providers can foster an
environment where students feel empowered, heard, and supported on their journey toward
well-being and personal growth.
The Journey to a Strong Therapeutic Relationship 

In this lesson, we will continue to explore the essential aspects of building a strong therapeutic
alliance within the school setting. We will discuss various strategies and insights to navigate the
delicate relationship between school mental health professionals and students. Additionally, we
will emphasize how cultural awareness and sensitivity play pivotal roles in creating an inclusive
and supportive atmosphere for all students. We will wrap up the lesson by looking at
assessment measures that serve to monitor the therapeutic alliance, equipping providers with
the tools to gauge the effectiveness of their practices and make informed decisions to better support students
How to Cultivate a Strong Therapeutic Alliance 

Key Strategies
General Best Practices 

You understand the importance of strong therapeutic alliances. Now Let's explore some best
practices for building them. 
Here are some general best practices for supporting strong therapeutic alliances described by
DeAngelis (2019): 
Mutuality and Collaboration 

Contemporary mental health treatment emphasizes the importance of mutuality and
collaboration, where therapists and clients are equal partners  working together to deﬁne and
actualize therapy goals, including the direction the therapy is taking  (DeAngelis, 2019).
Forming an equal partnership between clients and therapists involves a commitment to this two-
way relationship.
Flexibility and Responsiveness 

Every student is unique. One size does not ﬁt all in treatments and interventions. Students have
different personalities, abilities, strengths, and challenges. Flexibility and responsiveness help
you adjust service delivery in a way that allows treatment to be individualized. When you're
ﬂexible, you can consider and meet the unique needs and attributes of each student.
Flexibility could appear in the method of service delivery, such as when and where treatment
sessions take place. This could look like agreeing to have sessions after school hours if that works
better with the student s schedule. Being ﬂexible lets the student know you are willing to meet
their needs, and this helps build trust and positive regard in the relationship.
Related to ﬂexibility is responsiveness or noticing changes and then modifying treatment based
on them. Modiﬁcations may be changes to goals or treatment methods, treatment approaches, or
styles of interaction. For example, a school-based mental health clinician may notice that
mindfulness meditations do not improve a student s anxiety symptoms. They may then decide to
respond by changing the method of treatment.
Feedback 

One way to facilitate ﬂexibility and responsiveness is to actively seek out feedback from students
through their recommendations and suggestions for what is and isn't working for them. There
are many ways to gather feedback, depending on the situation. Examples include directly asking,
conducting surveys, or using teacher observations.
Directly asking students can facilitate clear conversations, but some students may be
uncomfortable directly providing feedback. Surveys or session rating scales can be used in a way
that is more comfortable. These measures can also provide data to follow progress over time. One
such system is the Partners for Change Outcomes Management System (PCOMS) - to learn more
about PCOMS, keep going with the lesson  
Teacher observations are also useful. Teacher input on students  progress provides valuable
information on whether treatment methods are working or need to be modiﬁed.
Responding to Negative Emotions 

Experiencing negative emotions is one of the most common reasons that people seek out
