Experiencing negative emotions is one of the most common reasons that people seek out
therapy, so it is essential to respond to negative emotions effectively. This can be challenging,
especially when interacting with many 
different students every day. Being overwhelmed can lead
different students every day. Being overwhelmed can lead
to provider burnout and compassion fatigue, which makes it much harder to engage effectively.
Self-care and self-awareness can help prevent this and ensure that students receive the best care
You may recall that we emphasize this point and provide various strategies in our Tier 1
lesson, Wellness Enhancement for School Staff.
Ending Effectively 

Knowing when to start treatment is important, but it is equally important to know when to end.
Treatment planning may set an end date from the start, but this may need to be adjusted based on
the progress being made. Ultimately, the goal of therapy is to increase students' self-su ciency.
However, it's also essential not to end too early. Therefore, it is necessary to have a plan for what
indicates that students are truly ready to end treatment. This planning balances their need for
independence and makes sure that they have gotten the most out of therapy. Strategies for a
successful ending include: 
mutual discussion about how the therapy went 
discussion of future plans for coping and functioning 
help with using new skills (growth is an ongoing process) 
expression of pride in the student for growth and progress and appreciation of the
relationship 
Ideally, this conversation should take place during a scheduled meeting or conference where the
student, family members, and all relevant parties can participate.
Therapy can also conclude at opportune moments, aligning with the end of a school year or
semester, allowing for a seamless transition. 
Along with these best practices, the growth of the therapeutic alliance is linked to the successful
resolution of ruptures, breaches, and repairs (Ardito & Rabellino, 2011). Let's explore what this
means.
Repairing Ruptures 

There are many times when the alliance may encounter problems, such as disagreements,
mistrust, or misinterpretations. These are called breaches or ruptures. Ruptures are not
uncommon within therapeutic relationships. In fact, research suggests that these ruptures may
be inevitable in any therapeutic alliance (Muran, 2000). The ability to respond to these issues
quickly can make the difference between good and great therapy.
When therapeutic relations break down, ruptures must be repaired. Signs of a rupture can
include a student withdrawing or becoming confrontational, including verbal and nonverbal
expressions of frustration or anger (DeAngelis, 2019).
Such distancing behavior may result from a lack of trust or the student feeling judged or
misunderstood. If the therapist senses the start of a breakdown or a strain in the relationship,
they must not let it grow but clarify any issues and repair mistakes (Knox & Cooper, 2015).
Let's look at some best practices to respond effectively
to ruptures.
Step 1
Recognize the Rupture 

The ﬁrst step in repairing ruptures is being aware that there is one. Sometimes, it will be
clear that a rupture has occurred:
students may directly tell you that there is a problem
you may get feedback from caregivers
you may notice concerning behaviors or a change in behavior
However, at other times, it may be more difficult to tell that there is a problem:
a student may not be comfortable sharing that there has been an issue
they may communicate the problem in more subtle ways
In general, signs of ruptures can be assigned to two categories: confrontation and
withdrawal (Muran, 2010).
Confrontation involves a direct discussion of the issue causing the rupture. It could be that a
student tells you directly that something has offended them, upset them, or is just not
working for them. It is crucial not to take confrontations personally, but instead, use them as
opportunities to grow and continue building the alliance.
Withdrawal occurs when there is a problem, but the student may not feel comfortable
expressing it directly. Instead, they may participate less in treatment. Withdrawal could look
like canceling sessions, giving one-word responses to questions, or not following treatment
plans. Withdrawal can be challenging to detect because something else could also cause
these behaviors. If you feel that a student may be withdrawing, it may be helpful to directly
ask about it in a way that is empathetic and understanding, based on curiosity rather than
criticism. 
Step 2
Explore Solutions 

Once you have identiﬁed that a rupture is happening, the next step is to explore solutions.
Since ruptures are so common, it is important to have strategies for responding to them. No
matter how the rupture is addressed, it is important to always stay open-minded and to work
openly and honestly to repair it.
There are two main ways to address ruptures: directly or indirectly (Muran, 2010). Directly
addressing the issue may include talking about it with the student. Indirectly addressing the
issue may involve the clinician adjusting treatment plans or goals without directly discussing
it. Direct and indirect approaches may both be used in different circumstances.  
Step 3
Apply Solutions 

Once you have found a solution, the next step is to implement it. Some examples of
implementing solutions may be:
adjusting the number of sessions per week
breaking down a goal that is too overwhelming into smaller steps
increasing the time frame of treatment
Solutions may also focus on the relationship: if a rupture was caused by something said by a
clinician, it may be necessary to apologize and use the feedback to avoid similar phrases in
the future. No matter what the solution is, it is important to be consistent and follow through
with the modiﬁcations that are made. This helps build trust and shows that you are reliable. 
Putting Values into Practice
We have reviewed values and best practices of creating a strong therapeutic alliance. Now let's
examine the use of foundational communication techniques that show these values in action.
Communication in the Therapeutic Relationship 

The cornerstone of productive and empathetic communication is the art of active and
reﬂective listening. Active and reﬂective listening techniques form the foundation for effective
communication and are invaluable skills in building meaningful relationships. Let's explore
each of them in detail to grasp their signiﬁcance in fostering better connections and empathy
within all of your interactions.
Active Listening 

Research conducted by Pinto, et al. (2012) identiﬁed active listening as the primary factor that
enhances engagement in building a strong therapeutic alliance. Listening may sound simple -
after all, you listen to people talk every day. However, there is more to effective listening than
meets the eye (or ear).
Active listening involves using gestures, comments, and body language to show that you are
listening attentively. You might remember this from the  All Hands on Deck  course  Active
listening is important in building a therapeutic alliance because it helps show that you are
invested and interested in the student, which helps to build trust and rapport. Click through the
tabs below for tips on being an active listener.
Be Fully Present 

To be actively involved in a therapy session, the ﬁrst step is being fully present. Being fully present
communicates to the student that you are there for them and committed to working with them,
helping to build trust and comfort in communication. Being fully present shows students that
they have your undivided attention. This can mean a lot of different things, but in general, you
want to:
have open body language (for example, facing the student, comfortable, nodding, etc.)
maintain eye contact
be aware of the surroundings
focus on what is being said
minimize distractions/disruptions
Pay Attention to Nonverbal Cues 

Nonverbal cues can be underestimated in our communication; however, these cues make up
around 65% of the meaning being communicated. For example, a student who feels sad or tired
may put their head down on their desk. Facial expressions and body language are important
nonverbal cues to pay attention to as well  
Use Short, Verbal Affirmations and Acknowledgments 

Using short, verbal affirmations allows you to show you are listening without interrupting. They
include words, phrases, and sounds like: 
That makes sense  
I see what you mean.  
Go on.
Yes.
Mhm.
Right.
Withhold Judgment 

The goals of active listening are to understand what is being said and to show your attentiveness
and engagement. Making judgments, arguing, or disagreeing with the speaker can distract from
the content of what they are saying. One way to think of this is that you are listening to
understand, not to respond. This can be challenging because often, in everyday conversations, we
spend a lot of time planning what to say in response to someone. However, this is not the goal for
active listening. 
Reflective Listening
One way to apply active listening skills is to put what you heard to the test by reﬂecting what you
heard by paraphrasing what was said back to the speaker. This is called reﬂective listening.
Reﬂective listening is a strategy for building a strong, empathetic relationship. This sounds like
a simple skill, but it can be very powerful in showing empathy and understanding.
Let's review this video example, in which Sadness (blue
character) is listening to Bing-Bong (pink character): 
Communication Skills: Empathetic Listening - Inside Out, 2015
Communication Skills: Empathetic Listening - Inside Out, 2015
What went well in Sadness s interaction with Bing Bong?
How do you think she helped him?
With that interaction in mind, Let's look at some of the advantages of reﬂective listening and
why it can be helpful. 
Non-judgmental: Earlier, it was mentioned that one of the aspects adolescents want
most within a therapeutic relationship is a non-judgmental space to talk. When you
listen reﬂectively, you are not trying to change the person s mind, offer solutions,
or make any judgments about what is said, either positively or negatively. Instead,
you are showing that you heard and understood it. 
Ensure Everyone is on the Same Page: This can help prevent miscommunications.
By reﬂecting on what you hear or observe, students have an opportunity to clarify
any misunderstandings. Sometimes, especially for younger children, they may not
be able to express exactly what they are feeling yet. Talking through the problems
together can help them (and you) address the issue more directly and accurately.
Allows Students to be Heard: Again, sometimes just being heard is a valuable
experience. Reﬂective listening shows the speaker that they were understood,
heard, and validated. This is mutually beneﬁcial  it helps build trust and rapport
and makes a stronger therapeutic alliance. It can also be a cathartic release for the
speaker.
Here are some phrases the show reﬂective listening. Click to enlarge.
Reﬂective Listening Examples
When using reﬂective listening, it can be helpful to differentiate between the layers of what a
speaker is saying. Flip through the cards below to see these different layers.
What is being said at a surface
level? What did the student tell you?
What is it that they are talking
about? It can be important to clarify
the details of what is happening on
a surface level before going deeper.
What feelings are being
communicated? Sometimes,
they can be explicitly stated or
underneath the surface and
implied. Feelings may be shown
by words, but also by body
language and demeanor
(remember the importance of
nonverbal cues ). If you are
unsure of what someone is
While reﬂective listening is a powerful skill, it takes time to develop and can be challenging.
feelings. This is where you put
Let's look at some common issues to avoid when using reﬂective listening.
Combination of content and
together what you discovered,
linking the two together in a
cohesive statement. This might
include phrases like,  It seems like
you were feeling ___ because ___.
High-Risk Responses 

A  high-risk  response in listening is a statement that is likely to take the focus away from the
conversation and generate negative feelings (Katz and McNulty, 1994). Some of these phrases
may have a valid use in certain contexts, but they are not ideal for meeting the goals of reﬂective
listening. These statements also can be distracting or perceived as condescending or
judgmental. 
Take a look at the three categories of high-risk responses below. 
Evaluating and Judging: As mentioned earlier, the approach of reﬂective listening is
intended to show a lack of judgment, creating a safe space to share true thoughts
and feelings. 
Solving: Sometimes, solutions are necessary. However, at other times, coming up
with solutions can be distracting from the issue at hand. it's important to ﬁrst
make sure that you understand the situation well enough to come up with effective
and useful solutions. You must also know that the student wants and is ready for
solutions. It can be helpful to check in with the speaker and see if they want
solutions at this moment, or if they just want to talk.
Withdrawing: Withdrawing responses and phrases can also get in the way of
reﬂective listening. Withdrawing responses communicate to the student that you
are uncomfortable with the emotions they express. Such a response can also
minimize what the person may be going through and shut down the conversation.
This can make it harder to build trust in the relationship, and students may be less
willing to open up again in the future. 
Click through these  ashcards to look at some examples
of each type of high-risk response. Before you turn the
card over, try to think of your own examples of these
types of unwanted responses.
Judging: 

I disagree.
You shouldn t have done that.
Why would you do that?
That s your fault.  
You re only thinking this way
because you are angry.
You have problems with
authority.
Solving: 

You need to do ___.  
You should try doing ___.  
This is the right thing to do.  
I would suggest that you ____.  
If I were you, I would ____.  
You could  x this by ____.  
Withdrawing: 

Every cloud has a silver lining.  
Everything happens for a reason.  
You will feel better tomorrow.  
Other people have it worse.  
Look on the bright side...  
Try not to worry about it so much.
Now that we've uncovered the importance of active and reﬂective listening, let's put your
knowledge to the test
Growing Trust and Connection 

Nurturing the Therapeutic Alliance in the School Setting
As we look into the intricacies of nurturing therapeutic alliance in a school setting, it's
important to emphasize that working with children and teens comes with its own set of
considerations and challenges. Factors such as motivation, attachment style, developmental
stage, family engagement, and cultural background can signiﬁcantly impact the maintenance and
success of a strong therapeutic relationship. Let's explore each of these factors in detail to
better understand their importance in the school context.
Motivation 

Research has found that around 40-60% of youth drop out of or do not complete therapy
(Duncan, et al., 2006). 
A relevant factor to consider when building a therapeutic alliance is motivation. One unique
aspect of working with youth in a school environment is that youth are typically not self-
referred to treatment. Youth may be provided services not because they asked for them but
because parents, teachers, or other concerned adults identiﬁed the need. This can, in turn,
affect their motivation to participate in therapy. 
Various levels of motivation are described by the stages of the change model (Prochaska &
Velicer, 1997). While this model was originally developed for those seeking to quit smoking, it
has broad applications and is used for many types of goals, both in and out of mental health. 
The model has distinct stages, but it is not a one-time or linear process; people may go between
various stages in a different order, go through each stage multiple times, or even show features
of multiple stages at the same time.
Click through the tabs below to see how the stages of
change could show up in the school setting.
Precontemplation 

This is the ﬁrst stage of the model and involves little desire for change or awareness of a problem.
Many children may be at this stage, especially if they are not developmentally able to understand
why they were referred to treatment. They may also be at a stage where they understand the
problem but are uninterested in treatment because they had no input and were referred by an
adult. It is important to modify treatment based on these distinct issues to avoid pushing students
too far and causing resentment. The precontemplation stage has four subcategories:
Reluctant: Reluctant students are in the precontemplation stage of change because they may
be unaware of the problem or do not consider it important. A strategy for engaging with
reluctance is to discuss it empathetically and sensitively, asking open-ended questions.
These students may not be directly opposed to treatment, but they are still hesitant. 
Rebellious: Rebellious students may actively and directly oppose treatment. They may be
rebellious because of stigma, past negative experiences with treatment, or a desire for
independence which may be more common in adolescents because of their increasing need
for autonomy. It is important to consider these concerns compassionately and
empathetically to build trust   one strategy for this may be providing choices in treatment
sessions to show collaboration.
Resigned: These students may not be opposed to treatment but feel as though they do not
have the capability to change. The idea of change may seem too overwhelming, or they may
view their situation as  just the way things are.  Those with depression may be more
susceptible to resigned mindsets. Strategies for overcoming a resigned mindset include
instilling hope, building conﬁdence, and breaking down goals into smaller and more
manageable pieces. One way to build conﬁdence is to note progress or use strength-based
language  highlighting and emphasizing the student's strengths, abilities, and positive
qualities, rather than dwelling on weaknesses or deﬁcits. 
Rationalizing: Rationalizing mindsets give reasons for why they are not interested in
treatment   they may have clear reasons to reject therapy. Engaging with a student's
rationalizations has the potential to turn into a debate or argument. It is important to use
empathetic and reﬂective listening strategies with rationalizing mindsets.
Contemplation 

This is a stage of conﬂict. People may realize the need for change but have conﬂicting views about
it. A student in this stage may understand why they are receiving mental health treatment, but
they are not sure if they want it or not. Sometimes a student may be conﬂicted because they have
internalized stigma. For example, a student may be experiencing symptoms of depression and
want relief but be afraid that going to counseling may make them appear  weak  or too different
from others. Again, this can also be the case if a student is referred to treatment by an adult or
authority ﬁgure. The student may not be 100% on board if they did not make the decision to
pursue treatment. 
Preparation/Determination 

In this stage, students are preparing to make changes. They see something in their life that they
want to change, improve, or grow, and they prepare to make those changes. In a school setting,
this might look like a student who acknowledges they are experiencing mental health challenges
and reaches out to a trusted adult for help. 
Action 

In this stage, students actively address concerns and follow through on a plan. In a school setting,
this might mean that a student actively engages with treatment, attends therapy sessions, and
follows their treatment plan.   
Maintenance 

The maintenance stage involves using the skills learned during treatment to support the progress
that has been made. For example, a student who experiences panic attacks may use their
knowledge of panic attack triggers to know when to use coping strategies or reach out for
additional support. 
Great job learning about the stages of change  Depending on your student's level of motivation
and attitudes about therapy, you may need to consider adjusting some of the techniques and
strategies that you use to build rapport. It is important to meet clients where they are, rather
than where you might want them to be. Here are some strategies for building rapport with
students who may come to treatment before they are ready, as well as some responses to avoid. 
Table of dos and dont's (Adapted from DiGiuseppe et al., 1996) 
Attachment Style 

Another factor to consider when building a therapeutic alliance is the attachment styles of both
the student and the provider. The theory of attachment, originally developed by  John Bowlby
(1969), describes ways that people tend to bond with others, called  attachment styles.  Based
on this theory attachment styles are developed from early childhood experiences. The
attachment style that a person has is reﬂective of the relationship they may have had with early
caregivers. Everyone has an attachment style, including students and school-based mental
health clinicians, and this can show up in the way that a therapeutic alliance forms. Awareness
of both student attachment styles and your own attachment style can inform a successful
strategy for building a strong therapeutic alliance. There are four general attachment styles or
default ways of forming relationships.
Flip the  ashcards below to explore common
attachment styles.
Secure 

Secure attachments come from
strong, supportive, and loving
relationships with early caregivers.
Love and safety are consistently
given in early childhood, and this
leads to feeling safe and con dent
in forming connections with others.
Anxious 

Anxious (also referred to as
ambivalent) attachment stems
from inconsistent experiences
with caregivers in early
childhood. Love and safety are
provided, but not consistently.
This leads to fear in forming
connections with others,
particularly fear of
abandonment. All students may
Avoidant 

Avoidant attachment also
stems from experiences with
caregivers in early childhood.
This style is theorized to come
Disorganized attachment
from emotional or physical
comes from inconsistent and
needs not being met. As a
unsafe relationships in early
result, the child perceives
childhood. This attachment
rejection from their caregiver.
style results in feelings of
This leads to a sensitivity to
unease in relationships and
rejection and a desire for
inconsistent behaviors.
Disorganized attachment may
include behaviors from
avoidant and
4 of 4
Developmental Stage 

Working within the school setting it is important to consider a student's developmental stage
which inﬂuences the methods and techniques that may be used to build the therapeutic alliance.
The most effective techniques to build a therapeutic relationship with a five-year-old are quite
different from the most effective techniques for a sixteen-year-old. Let's look at some key
developmental milestones to take into account when choosing approaches to establishing
therapeutic connections across different age groups.
Early Childhood: ages 0   5 

Communication through play
Learning language/vocabulary
Developing ﬁne motor skills
Developing problem-solving and critical thinking skills
Developing early literacy skills
Middle Childhood: ages 6-12 

Growing in independence
Growing vocabulary and ability to express feelings and emotions
Continuing to develop ﬁne motor skills, problem-solving, and
critical thinking skills
Adolescence: ages 13+ 

Growing need for independence
Developing and reﬁning individual identity
Transitioning to adulthood
it's important to remember that children of the same age may look different. Development is
not the same in every child, so looking at a child s age alone may not be enough to determine
what techniques are best for building a therapeutic relationship. It is also important to consider
how needs change throughout these various developmental stages. Using feedback and
observing how students respond to you can help you adjust your rapport-building strategies. 
Family Engagement 

Family involvement is part of a successful and effective school-based mental health program.
When you are working with children and teens, the therapeutic alliance is not just between the
provider and the student   it also includes a relationship with their family and caregivers.
Collaboration with families allows mental health providers to develop treatment plans that are
realistic and align with the family's values, resources, and goals.  Families can serve as an
ongoing source of support and reinforcement for therapeutic interventions. Their active
involvement can help sustain progress. Thus, the same strategies of unconditional positive
regard, empathy, and genuineness can also be applied when working with families to ensure
that relationships are strong. Stay tuned for our  Inclusive Treatment Planning  lesson to learn
more speciﬁc techniques for building strong relationships with families. 
Cultural Responsiveness 

Promoting a Nurturing Therapeutic Environment
Cultural identities inﬂuence our lives, impact our experiences, shape our values, and become a
lens through which we see the world. When building relationships, it is important to consider
how our worldviews may be different from others. Having differences in cultural identities does
 not prevent successful therapeutic alliances from being built, and research supports that these
alliances can be equally strong; however, it is a factor to consider (Wintersteen et al., 2005).
Research identiﬁes two possible barriers. Clients may be less comfortable with a provider who
has a different identity than them, and providers may have implicit biases (Liu, et al., 2022).
Developing a multicultural orientation can help address these issues. Let's look at the pieces of a
multicultural orientation (Hook, et al., 2018).
Multicultural Orientation 

Multicultural orientation means that you consider your own and your students' backgrounds,
beliefs, and values when you are helping them. Multicultural orientation has three interrelated
components: (a) cultural humility and respect, deﬁned as a practitioner s tendency to be client-
centered, curious, and open to diverse perspectives; (b) cultural opportunity, or the degree to
which a practitioner can pick up on and address cultural themes when they come up in
treatment sessions; and (c) cultural comfort, or the practitioner s level of calm and courage in
engaging in discussions of culture and identity.
Developing a Multicultural Orientation 

 Two important skills that can help develop a multicultural orientation:
Start by understanding your own culture and implicit bias.  Recognize how your own
cultural background inﬂuences your interactions. Implicit bias, though often unconscious,
can also impact your communication and actions. Identifying and addressing these biases
helps align your behavior with your values. We mentioned in our core MTSS course that
taking the Implicit Association Test (IAT) is a great place to start in building self-
awareness. 
Understand your students' cultures.  Learn about your students' backgrounds, their values,
beliefs, and traditions. Avoid stereotypes and remember that individuals within a culture
can be diverse so avoid stereotypes. Don't assume, ask questions  Then adapt your
approach to each student as appropriate for true cultural responsiveness.
To learn more about the multicultural orientation
framework download the PDF below.
The Multicultural Orientation Framework.pdf
140.3 KB
Self-Reﬂection:
What are your cultural identities? How might that show up in your school-based clinician role? 
For more information on applying cultural competence to your practice, download the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Association (SAMHSA) guidelines below
Improving Cultural Competence Quick Guide.pdf
414 KB
And, to review an example of applying cultural skills in practice, follow the link below to an
article on the National Alliance for Mental Illness (NAMI)'s website.
How School-Based Mental Health Providers Can Help
Hispanic/Latinx Students
Jaime Torres has been seeing his school social worker, Theresa Jones, for
individual and family therapy for some time now. The bright, timid high school
senior grappled with feelings of hopelessness and panic attacks for several
years. His struggles started with palpitations, night sweats and an
overwhelming sense of the room spinning out of control.
READ MORE NAMI 
Let's review the lesson.
The therapeutic alliance is a powerful tool for providing 
effective and supportive therapy. Therapeutic alliances are built from the very beginning of treatment and
are part of an ongoing and continuously evolving process.
In order to increase the likelihood that treatment and support will be effective
Edward Bordin (1979) proposed that the therapeutic alliance has three key
elements: an agreement on goals; a collaboration on tasks; and the development of
a bond between the practitioner and the person being supported.
It is important to recognize the signiﬁcance of agency, empathetic listening,
friendship-like bonds, and ﬂexible service delivery in creating meaningful
therapeutic connections with students. By embracing these principles, providers
can foster an environment where students feel empowered, heard, and supported
on their journey toward well-being and personal growth.
Communication skills, such as active/reﬂective listening and repairing ruptures,
can help build the therapeutic alliance
Factors such as motivation, attachment style, developmental stage, family
engagement, and cultural background can signiﬁcantly impact the maintenance and
success of a strong therapeutic alliance.
Applying a multicultural orientation is essential in building strong relationships and
it involves three interrelated components; cultural humility, cultural opportunity,
and cultural comfort.
Feedback for the therapeutic alliance can be sought out formally or informally, and
one formal tool is PCOMS. Results from the PCOMS surveys can be analyzed to help
identify any issues that may have been missed during sessions. 
EXIT
***** Growing Your Tier 3 Supports - 1.2
Welcome to Growing Your Tier 3 Supports  In this course, you will learn about the
interventions, best practices, and implementation of Tier 3 of Multi-tiered System
of Supports (MTSS), with a focus on supporting behavioral and mental health. Like
seeds planted in a garden, growing supports at Tier 3 creates a beautiful garden
where everyone is ﬂourishing. Let's get started
Collaborative Care and Case Management
Inclusive Treatment Planning
Lesson 1 of 2
***** Collaborative Care and Case Management 
Outcomes:
1. Understand and consider the effectiveness of a collaborative care model in the school
setting
2. Recognize the core features of case management services and the function of the case
managers
3. Identify the principles of the Wraparound service delivery process for students with
severe emotional/behavioral concerns
4. Consider cultural awareness, equity, and inclusion practices in the coordination of
mental health services for students
Building Stronger School Communities 

Integrating Mental Health Providers into the Academic Setting: The Collaborative Care Model 

Parents and caregivers who have a child that is struggling with mental health issues face many
challenges. 
Knowing what to do, where to go, and what questions to ask can be confusing and, at times,
discouraging.
The goal of mental and behavioral health services in schools is to make sure students can easily
get the support they need to thrive. Families often rely on schools to help them understand and
successfully navigate behavioral and mental health support for their children. But sometimes,
there are obstacles that make it hard to provide this help effectively. One common barrier is a
disconnected relationship between support provided in school and services provided outside
the school. Let's pinpoint some of these issues.
In some cases, school staff may not know who the outside clinicians are, which
students they are working with, or what they are working on (Barrett et al., 2013)
Sometimes the mental health provider might only come to the school for a short
time each week, like one or two days. They may not be seen as a regular part of the
school's support team.
Within schools, those providing direct services to children and students, including
counselors, school psychologists, and social workers, are often siloed and work in
relative isolation from one another (Adelman & Taylor, 2021). This affects how well
they can provide support in the classrooms.
School staff might think that only mental health professionals should handle all the
mental health support.
All of these situations show that schools and mental health providers need better ways to work
together to provide students with support. Building relationships between community
providers, school staff, and families can make it easier for students to get the right help. One
way to do this is by using a teamwork approach, and a support network of collaborative care.
Collaborative care is, in general, a family-focused service delivery system that empowers
parents with the tools to: 
better address the needs of their child
prioritize information
easily connect with much-needed resources in and outside of the school setting
That sounds great, right? But let's dive into this a bit deeper.
Understanding Collaborative Care 

A student who experiences difficulties in multiple areas requires targeted assistance from
educators and providers who may not communicate or coordinate effectively with one another.
This creates division and gaps in care. That is where the collaborative care integrated system
comes in  This model of collaboration was originally developed in the 1990s by researchers at
the University of Washington for implementation in the healthcare system. Physicians and
psychiatric specialists worked together as a team to provide care for patients who were
experiencing a combination of physical and mental health issues.  Reist et al. (2022) reviewed
over 80 research trials that supported the collaborative care model resulting in signiﬁcantly
better clinical outcomes, greater patient and provider satisfaction, and reduced stigma around
mental health.
Research and review of collaborative care indicate this approach, like in the medical
environment, works well in the school setting to improve access to behavioral health and other
community services for children and adolescents (Lyons et al., 2019).
The goal is to provide holistic treatment and prevention for all of a student's needs.
Collaborative care is a structured system of shared planning, decision-making, goal setting, and
assumption of responsibilities by a team of educators, behavioral health, and mental health
providers working together cooperatively and with open communication. 
Flip the cards below to review the core objectives of
collaborative care.
Integration of Services: 

Integrating mental health personnel
into the academic setting thereby
improving access to behavioral
health interventions for children
and adolescents.
Consistent Collaboration: 

Coordinating continuous, and
consistent collaboration of mental
health personnel with school
personnel, students, and their
families, to optimize the
effectiveness of academic and
school behavioral health support
and resources.
A successful collaborative care system in the school setting combines effective teaming,
To improve outcomes for student
alignment with existing MTSS practices, along with strong communicative relationships. How
academic and mental health and
do these components serve to provide comprehensive, coordinated, and student-centered
wellbeing by treating the whole
support? Here is a breakdown:
student and whole family, focusing
Effective Teaming
on student and family
empowerment.
Collaborative care teams are responsible for developing and implementing comprehensive
support, responding to the diverse needs of students and families effectively. Review the aspects
of teaming and implementation below.
Creating a collaborative team: Educators, behavioral health providers and mental
health practitioners, including a designated case manager, form the core team. This
allows for the effective integration of services for students with multiple needs.
Utilizing Existing Resources: Existing school personnel or pre-established teams
address student needs. Emphasizing and optimizing available resources and
provider partnerships is most efficient.
Student and Family Engagement: Involve students and families in intervention
planning when suitable. Caregiver involvement varies based on factors like age,
developmental level, and need.
effective Communication: Facilitate consistent communication among team
members and external providers. Coordinate and track input and requests for
assistance within and outside the school.
Administrative Support and Supervision: Provide administrative support and
supervision to ensure smooth operation.
Continuous Review and Adaptation: Regularly review intervention approaches and
outcomes. Consider new approaches or team training when necessary.
Alignment with Existing MTSS framework 

Along with the key aspects mentioned above, collaborative care, building on the tiered service
delivery systems already in place in many schools, includes evidence-based interventions, data-
informed decision-making, and accountability for better student outcomes in academics,
behavior and social emotional wellbeing. In the school building, this looks like:
Evidence-based care: The collaborative care team develops, and updates evidence-based
intervention plans speciﬁcally addressing the targeted goals and outcomes for the student.
offer student and family education about academic behavioral and mental health concerns,
interventions, and strategies.
Data-informed decision-making in the form of:
Population-based care: The care team tracks a deﬁned group of students to ensure no
student "falls through the cracks." Students experiencing academic, behavioral, social,
and emotional issues can be identiﬁed through universal screening. Students can also be
referred to services by families, students, educators, other school personnel or outside
providers. After identiﬁcation, the care team systematically follows up with these students.
It allows for a more comprehensive and proactive response to the diverse needs of the
student population within the school setting. 
Measurement-based intervention: This means that support plans clearly deﬁne goals and
are measured routinely. The team tracks progress using aggregate data to inform and be on
alert when changes are needed. Teaming and regular consultation with mental and
behavioral specialists ensures interventions are effective.
Systematic case review and consultation: This includes weekly caseload reviews for
students not improving, speciﬁc recommendations from data collection, and more in-
depth assessments when necessary.  This allows the team to efficiently and effectively
adjust support as needed.
Accountability: The team evaluates provider and program-level outcomes for quality
improvement.
Relationship Building 

Arguably most important, collaborative care involves building strong relationships between the
student, the family, and the service providers, emphasizing student and family involvement in
decision-making. With the priority being to respond to student and family needs effectively,
collaborative care fosters mutual respect, trust, and open communication among all
stakeholders. Consistent and strong relationships within the collaborative care team are
essential for long-term success and facilitate consistent:
Student Engagement: Developing positive relationships with students is essential for
engaging them in the process of addressing their behavioral and mental health concerns.
When students feel valued and supported by the school staff, they are more likely to
participate in interventions and seek help when needed.
Caregiver Involvement: When parents feel connected to the school professionals involved
in their child's care, they are more likely to actively participate in treatment planning and
follow through with recommendations.
Information Sharing: effective relationship building promotes open and transparent
information sharing among team members. 
Collaboration between educators, school-employed mental health staff, and community-based
mental health professionals has been shown to improve absenteeism, office disciplinary
referrals, academic achievement, and behavioral health outcomes (Bates et al., 2019). As you can
see, when adapted for use in schools, collaborative care efforts contribute to improving the
quality of services and student access to support for all their needs.
Now that you have a better understanding of collaborative care, take a moment to reﬂect on the
effectiveness of the system.  Ask yourself these questions...
Does your school implement collaborative care or is there another coordinated system in place?
If yes, is it effective?
If you answered no, contemplate what a collaborative care model could look like in your school
building. Below are two resources that may be useful as you consider a
collaborative care system in your school.
Collaborative Care in Schools: Enhancing Integration and Impact in Youth Mental Health
Implementation of a School Mental Health Learning Collaborative Model to Support Cross-Sector
Collaboration
Case Management 

Organizing and Monitoring Individualized Services for Students
Establishing streamlined processes for Tier 3 mental health services is an essential part of the
MTSS framework. Schools should be ready to promptly plan and implement services when
needs arise. Collaborative care systems play a pivotal role in facilitating these efforts, with case
management as a key component. Let's review details about case management and the role of a
case manager in the school setting.
Deﬁning Case Management 

Trying to deﬁne case management is not as easy as it may sound. But let's go through some
broad deﬁnitions that have been used over time.
Planning and coordinating a package of health and social services that is
individualized to meet a particular client s needs.
- Moore, 1990, p. 444
A  process or method for ensuring that  individuals  are provided with
whatever services they need in a coordinated, effective, and efficient manner.
- Intagliata, 1981
Helping people whose lives have become unproductive due to the presence of
many problems that require assistance from several helpers at once.
- Ballew and Mink, 1996, p. 3
Monitoring, tracking and providing support to a client, throughout the course
of his/her treatment and after
- Ogborne and Rush, 1983, p. 136
Assisting and  individual  in re-establishing an awareness of internal
resources such as intelligence, competence, and problem-solving abilities;
establishing and negotiating lines of operation and communication between
the  individual  and external resources; and advocating with those external
resources in order to enhance the continuity, accessibility, accountability, and
e ciency of those resources.
- Rapp et al., 1992, p. 83
Assess ing  the needs of the client and the client s family, when appropriate,
and arranging, coordinating, monitoring, evaluating, and advocating for a
package of multiple services to meet the speciﬁc client s complex needs.
- National Association of Social Workers, 1992, p. 5
Surprisingly, there is no exclusive widely accepted deﬁnition of case management. But we all
can agree that case management is a support process that cuts across several different human
service systems, including education, all of which share common populations of children and
adolescents who are experiencing difficulties.
In the school setting, case management is the process of coordinating, planning and
monitoring supports and services inside and outside of school to meet the individual needs of
students who may be struggling in multiple areas.
Flip each card to unlock some of the major aspects of
case management.
Build Relationships: 

The case management process
begins with establishing trust
and relationship building. It is
centered on supporting the
student and family.
Identity Needs: 

The primary objective in this
process is to identify a student's
dif culties, their strengths and
interests, and any potential risks to
success. While every student goes
through an initial needs assessment
process, it's important to reassess
over time as needs and
circumstances often change.
Plan Supports: 

Case management involves a
system of coordinating intervention
that is timely, effective, ef cient,
and equitable. Service planning
establishes goals for students and
the actions that will be taken to
meet those goals. Goals should
include specific data measures that
will be used to assess a student s
progress.
Monitor Progress: 

A consistent system of follow-up on
implementation practices and
outcomes should be in place. Case
management involves continuously
monitoring and evaluating a
student s progress via the data
measures de ned in the service
planning stage.
The case management approach is about transforming lives through individualized care and
services to help students meet their goals. Adapting information from 'Using a Case
Management Approach to Increase Student Success in the K-12 Setting' (NABITA.org, 2023),
let's look at the steps to implementing a successful case management process in the school
setting.
Implementing a Successful Case Management System
Designed to help students meet their goals, case management is an efficient,
individualized system of coordinated care.
Let's review the steps to creating such a system.
Step 1
Develop and maintain a consistent process for the identification of students in needs.
As mentioned, identiﬁcation of needs is a primary aspect of case management.
Schools should develop both a data-driven system as well as a person based system to
identify personally and academically at risk students. Data driven referrals would
include students with high rates of discipline problems, poor attendance, struggling
academically, etc. A person based referral system includes receiving reports from
concerned parties when they recognize that a student is experiencing  personal,
emotional, or behavioral difficulty.
Step 2
Coordinate a system for connecting students to trained staff. 

Schools must have a system for connecting identiﬁed students with a designated
trained staff member for 1:1 support. Working with students individually, the sta
member should focus on building rapport, collect holistic information about the
student's needs and strengths, and develop an action plan for support.
Step 3
Build a network. 

One of the most important functions of the school case management system is
making requests for assistance from community mental health or other services. But
linking students and families to resources goes beyond merely providing them with a
referral list of available resources. Build a network of formal and informal resources
and relationships.  A designated case manager would serve as a conduit to developing
relationships and rapport with appropriate resources and community providers.
Step 4
Promote consistent communication with key stakeholders. 

A case management system serves to  bring together key stakeholders to increase
collaboration and communication. This includes providing guidance to all those who
are concerned about or who have made a referral for a student. A case management
system is partnering with treatment providers, communicating with parents, and
working with teachers and other school administrators to ensure continuity of care
across all of the student's areas of interaction and impact.
Step 5
Address systemic issues by investing in improving the overall
school climate. 

A case management approach addresses student issues at both the individual and the
systemic level. Implement school-wide campaigns aimed at improving student
mental health, decreasing bullying behaviors, and improving students' willingness to
seek help for themselves and others.
As mentioned in step 3 above, the case management process includes a designated sta
member to orchestrate care and advocacy for each student's individual needs  coordinating
and collaborating with students, parents, and staff to promote ease of access to school
academic, behavioral and mental health support, community services and resources.  The case
manager is an important part of the collaborative care system. School personnel who have
existing expertise working across systems and integrating physical health, behavioral health,
and education individuals such as school social workers, school nurses, school counselors, or
school psychologists may serve well as case managers. Below we examine the role and
responsibilities of a case manager.
The Role of the Case Manager 

Two women smiling
To streamline and expedite the delivery of appropriate services, MTSS teams may establish a
primary contact, the case manager, for each student requiring support in multiple areas and
their family. Expectations of the case manager are vast and vary based on the school's needs
and available resources.
Flip through the cards to review details of the general
expectations for case managers within a school setting
(Ballew & Mink, 1986).  
Engagement 
  
Securing parental permission
and involvement
Clarifying roles
Negotiating expectations
Planning 

Matching different family
and child needs with
available resources
Considering the likely
impediments to using
available resources
2 of 6
Recognizing student and
family strengths
Identifying common
outcomes as goals
Specifying short-term
objectives designed to
achieve the goals
Developing a coordinated
action plans that outline
tasks, responsibilities, and
timelines
Accessing Resources 

Connecting the student
with the needed school and
community resources
Empowering the family to
maintain connections with
school and community
resources
Negotiating working
relationships between the
Disengaging 

Maintaining ongoing
communication between
student, family, case
manager, and resource
Evaluating to determine
helpers
the extent to which goals
Monitoring implementation
have been achieved
of the coordinated action
Evaluating the extent of
plan
empowerment achieved by
parents to assume case
management roles
Establishing a step-by-step
transition plan
6 of 6
The case manager in some schools may have other responsibility and direct involvement with
implementing services.  These will vary from school to school and are dependent upon the
speciﬁc discipline and expertise of the case manager.
Sharing Case Management Responsibilities 

Some schools will have a dedicated staff member to manage services. However it may be more
practical in other schools to share the role, distributing the responsibilities of case
management between multiple individuals.
What does shared responsibility look like? 

The team works together to problem-solve concerns across content areas academic,
behavioral and mental health at the classroom level, and all tiers in conjunction with
interventionists and student caregivers to develop and monitor appropriate support and
services for students in need.
A team sharing case management duties, which may consist of instructional coaches,
department leads, team leaders, counselors, mental health practitioners, and behavioral
support personnel, commits to equitably and effectively fulﬁlling the following responsibilities:
Lead the team's collaborative problem-solving meetings
Lead review of academic, behavioral, social and emotional concerns to determine
the root cause at the classroom level
Review progress monitoring data at regular intervals to inform instruction,
interventions and support
Monitor implementation and ﬁdelity of intervention delivery
Document strategies, referrals, and intervention plans (in a district system)
Maintain communication with caregivers on student progress
Maintain community relationships and links to resources
That might sound easier said than done, right? No worries  Download the PDF below to see one
example of how a school designated roles and responsibilities, including case management
duties, within their MTSS team.
Tier-2-3-Team-Roles-and-Responsibilities.pdf
66.6 KB
Remember this is just one example. Your case management process will depend on your schools
staffng and resources. What is most important is the team working together to ensure
continuity of care when students are experiencing complex and/or multiple problems.
Students raising their hands in class
Whether a dedicated case manager, or a team sharing the case management responsibilities,
developing a streamline process of coordinating services signiﬁcantly improves
communication and resource access. Connecting supports across academic, behavioral and
mental health services, the case management approach positively impacts outcomes for
students and their families.
Wraparound 

Collaborative Support for Students Experiencing Intensive
Behavioral and Emotional difficulties
When children have chronic and severe emotional or behavioral health diagnoses, their families
may need assistance keeping their children in their home, school, or community. Ten percent
of all children and adolescents in the United States, about 7 million total, are estimated to have
serious emotional disorders (Williams, et.al 2018). 
There are systems of collaboration and case management that have been developed to help
schools assist students in situations of severe emotional and behavioral need. Community
partners such as the South Carolina Continuum of Care offer programming that schools and
families can turn to in such cases. One widely used program is called Wraparound. A team-
based, collaborative case management approach, Wraparound provides an example of multiple
organizations working together to provide a holistic program of support.
The Wraparound Process 

Wraparound is a team-based care planning approach that builds upon strengths to identify
appropriate formal and informal supports to address needs and also root causes of student
challenges. The Wraparound process involves a partnership with the student and their family. A
wraparound facilitator works with the family to build their wraparound team  an
interdisciplinary team of service providers, community members, friends, and other supports
that work together to create a comprehensive, individualized, and creative plan of care. With the
help of the team, the family and student take the lead in deciding team vision and goals. Team
members work together to put the plan into action, monitor how well it's working, and make
changes as needed.
Let's explore the Principles of the Wraparound Process
(adapted from nwic.org, 2023).
Family and student perspectives are intentionally elicited and prioritized during all phases of the
wraparound process.
Team members work cooperatively and share responsibility for developing, implementing, monitoring,
and evaluating a single wraparound plan. The plan reflects a blending of team members  perspectives,
mandates, and resources. The plan guides and coordinates each team member s work towards achieving
the family s long-term vision . And finally, the team ties the goals and strategies of the wraparound plan to
observable or measurable indicators of success, monitors progress towards these goals, and revises the
plan accordingly.
A wraparound team does not give up on, blame, or reject children, youth, and their families. When faced
with challenges or setbacks, the team continues working towards achieving the goals in the wraparound
plan.
