plan.
The wraparound process demonstrates respect for and builds on the values, preferences, beliefs, culture,
and identity of the student, their family, and their community.
To achieve the goals laid out in the wraparound plan, the team develops and implements a customized set
of strategies, supports, and services.
Wraparound encourages the full participation of family members  networks of interpersonal and
community relationships, and the care plan reflects activities and interventions that draw on sources of
natural support.
The wraparound process and the plan of care identify, build on, and enhance the capabilities, knowledge,
skills, and assets of the student and family, their community, and other team members
Planning is grounded in family members  perspectives and input. The team strives to provide options and
choices such that the plan reflects family values and preferences.
The Wraparound approach ensures that strategies are tailored to the unique strengths and
needs of each student, leading to more relevant and successful interventions.  Addressing
outcomes in multiple life domains through a single comprehensive plan and a commitment to
long-term planning promotes a cohesive and coordinated approach to care.
To learn more about Wraparound, download the
resources below
NATIONAL WRAPAROUND INITIATIVE (NWI)
Wraparound Basics or What Is Wraparound: An
Introduction
This page introduces Wraparound, a completely different way of responding
when children or youth experience serious mental health or behavioral
challenges.
READ MORE NATIONAL WRAPAROUND INITIATIVE (NWI) 
SCYAP
Wraparound Services
WRAP services are therapeutic activities and treatment interventions provided
to youth with behavioral health and other special needs.
READ MORE SCYAP 
Two hands bringing to puzzle pieces together
Wraparound in Schools
A student's wraparound plan can be used to organize and blend positive behavior support and
academic interventions as needed to ensure success at school.
Schools can use the principles and practices of wraparound for developing a continuum of
supports and services for all students. The wraparound process can also be integrated into
existing systems of school-wide positive behavior supports.
Elevate Support Practices in Your School
Case Management That Promotes Cultural Competence, Equity and
Inclusive Practices
Incorporating Cultural Competence into Case Management 

A diverse group of children standing in front of a colorful world map
We reviewed the importance of culturally competent skills and supportive training in the ﬁrst
lesson of this course.  This is equally critical to the successful coordination of services for
students and their families.
Becoming culturally competent is a developmental process involving self-awareness,
understanding others from a cultural frame of reference, and acquiring the skills to provide
culturally relevant and culturally sensitive practice. These skills can serve to eliminate barriers
in language, communication and family engagement. This can promote acceptance of resources
and most importantly consistent participation in interventions
Review these principles for improving cultural
competence (SAMSHA, 2014). And download the pdf
below for your resource library.
The focus of cultural competence, in practice, has historically been on
individual providers. However, counselors will not be able to sustain culturally
responsive treatment without their organization s (school's) commitment to
support and allocate resources to promote these practices.
An understanding of race, ethnicity, and culture (including one s own) is
necessary to appreciate the diversity of human dynamics and to treat all clients
effectively. 
Incorporating cultural competence into treatment improves therapeutic
decision-making and offers alternative ways to deﬁne and plan a treatment
program that is ﬁrmly directed toward progress and recovery as deﬁned by
both the counselor and the client. 
Consideration of culture is important at all levels of operation individual,
programmatic, and organizational and across behavioral health treatment
settings. It is also important in all activities (including research and education)
and at every treatment phase--outreach, initial contact, screening, assessment,
placement, treatment, and continuing care and recovery support. 
Achieving cultural competence in an organization requires the participation of
racially and ethnically diverse groups and underserved populations in the
development and implementation of culturally responsive practices, program
structure and design, treatment strategies and approaches, and sta
professional development. 
Public advocacy of culturally responsive practices can increase trust among the
community, agency, and staff. The community is thus empowered with a voice
in organizational operations. 
SAMHSA
Loading
VIEW ON SAMHSA 
Promoting Equity and Inclusive Practices 

Page 1 of 341A TreATmenT ImprovemenT proTocolImproving CulturalCompetencePage1/341 Diverse group of children smiling
It is arguably one of the most important responsibilities of the mental health case manager or
case management team to ensure equity and inclusive practices in all aspects of the care
management system.
School behavioral health teams can ensure that every student has the opportunity to be as
healthy as possible by:
improving access to mental and behavioral health care
promoting quality mental and behavioral health programs and practices
reducing persistent disparities in mental health and substance use services for
underserved populations and communities.
Ways to foster an inclusive and informed school climate 

Promote an inclusive environment that encourages involvement as well as equal
access.
Consider how to communicate about children and adolescent mental health in ways
that those who are not mental health professionals can understand.
Provide strategies and tools including coaching to make sure that teachers,
principals, parents, caregivers, and key stakeholders learn what you would like
them to know about school mental health and student wellness.
Be knowledgeable and able to identify (expose) bias in discipline practices, school
policies, and student outcomes. This includes, bias by race and  bias distributed
across identity such as gender, sexuality, class, ability, etc.
The list is long, but the point is, schools (with access to almost the entire population of children
and teens ) can and should identify and implement strategies to eliminate bias and promote
equity for all students.
Social justice is woven into key elements of the Code of Professional Conduct
for Case Managers... speciﬁcally the emphasis on the dignity and worth of each
individual and consistently high standards for integrity, ﬁdelity, and
objectivity.
- The Commission for Case Manager Certification (CCMC)
See the complete Case Manager Code of Conduct below.
CCMCERTIFICATION
Loading
VIEW ON CCMCERTIFICATION 
Great work
Let's review the lesson.
Collaborative care is a structured system of shared planning, decision-making, goal
setting, and assumption of responsibilities by a team of educators, behavioral
health, and mental health providers working together cooperatively and with open
communication.   
Collaborative care involves effective teaming, and relationship building and aligns
with existing an MTSS framework.
Page 1 of 19CODE OFPROFESSIONAL CONDUCTfCASEMANAGERSPage1/19 Case management is an important component of collaborative care. It includes the
process of coordinating, and monitoring supports and services inside and outside
of school to meet the individual needs of students who may be struggling in
multiple areas.
To carry out case management responsibilities, some schools will have a dedicated
staff member to manage services. Other schools will rely on case management as a
process where existing school personnel will share the role, distributing the
responsibilities of case manager between multiple individuals.
Wraparound services are an example of multiple organizations working together
collaboratively to provide a holistic program of support for students with severe
emotional issues. The principles of Wraparound can be used in schools to develop a
continuum of supports and services for all students
It is the responsibility of the mental health case manager or case management team
to provide culturally relevant and culturally sensitive practice. Also, to ensure equity
and inclusive practices in all aspects of support services for students and their
families.
Inclusive Treatment Planning
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
***** Inclusive Treatment Planning 
Outcomes:
1.  Describe the key components of a treatment plan
2. Identify and explain the importance of key partners in the collaborative development of
treatment plans in the Multi-Tiered System of Supports framework
3. Describe common challenges and strategies for engaging families in the development
of treatment plans
4. Describe the advantages and disadvantages of labeling in treatment planning
5. differentiate between strengths-based and deﬁcit-based language in the development
and facilitation of treatment plans
The Essentials of Treatment Planning 

What is Treatment Planning?
Imagine a classroom where every student is unique, each with their own strengths, challenges,
and personal experiences. In this diverse and dynamic setting, it's essential that you, as mental
health providers, provide treatments to students who need Tier 3 supports, and adopt a
comprehensive and inclusive approach to support every student. One crucial aspect of this
approach is treatment planning. Now, Let's learn about what treatment planning entails, the
best practices of treatment planning, and why it's so important to provide equitable mental
health services to all students.
A pen and notepad atop a desk
Treatment planning is the development of a plan for the interventions that will be used to
treat students. Treatment planning is an essential part of clinical practice, both in and outside of
schools  Treatment planning is a process where you collaborate with students, their families,
and other stakeholders to assess needs, set goals, select tailored interventions, monitor
progress, and make necessary adjustments. The goal is to provide individualized, evidence-
based support that considers students' strengths, challenges, and cultural backgrounds.
Key Components to Treatment Planning 

There are six key components to treatment planning:
Student History
Strengths and Interests
Areas of Opportunity
Goals and Objectives
Plan of Action
Student/Family Agreement
Below is an example of a treatment planning document.
Click through the items to learn more about each key
component
Student information/history 

Student information is important in drafting treatment plans. Information can include the student s
name, age, grade level, source of referral, date, and the expected length of treatment. It is also helpful to
include information about the student s history which may involve family/medical history, prior
psychiatric diagnoses, current medical conditions, social history, or any significant life events that may
contribute to understanding the client.
Families and other collateral contacts like school counselors, school nurses, and teachers can provide
valuable insight  This offers a great opportunity to involve the family s voice in your treatment planning,
especially when working with minors.
Strengths & interests 

Strengths and interests are a great way to build a well-rounded view of your students. Sometimes, as
mental health providers or educators, it can be easy to focus on the deficits or challenges your students
may be facing. However, considering a full view of their strengths and attributes helps build rapport and
mutual respect.
Areas of opportunity 

This part of the plan explains the  why  for treatment. This may include data from assessments, feedback
from teachers or families, or a diagnosis. It is important to use respectful and inclusive language in this
section. You will learn more about that later in the lesson
SMARTIE goals 

Goals are an essential part of the treatment plan. Clarity about what is hoped to be accomplished by the
end of treatment is central to building a strong relationship and supporting the student. One way to frame
goals is by making them SMARTIE:
Specific
Measurable
Attainable
Relevant
Time-limited
Inclusive
Equitable
Goals can also be short-term and long-term; some goals might be more urgent and time-sensitive, while
others may take more time to reach. You can break goals down into shorter-term objectives. These are
smaller steps that will help meet the overall goal. It is important to always be mindful of academic and
behavioral goals given the school setting.
Plan of action 

This is the  how  of treatment. This section should describe the interventions and strategies that are
targeted to the goals of treatment. This could include the specific type of intervention or therapy used,
such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). Options for interventions will be discussed in the
"Therapeutic Practices" lesson later in this course  Another important component of the plan of action is
the description of how progress will be monitored, including how frequently progress will be assessed,
when parents/guardians will be updated, and when goals are met. 
Student/family agreement 

Another critical piece of the plan is to ensure that the student and their family are on board. In many cases,
families are legally required to agree to treatment before it can begin. This agreement on goals with the
student and families is a significant factor in building a strong relationship. Continuing a strong
relationship throughout the treatment process may help improve treatment outcomes. Ways to involve
families and students in the planning process and throughout treatment will also be discussed later in this
lesson
Treatment Planning Scenario
Let's apply what we ve learned about treatment planning to a real-world scenario  Click the link
below to download the Blank Treatment Plan PDF, then continue to the scenario.
 to Download the Blank Treatment Plan.pdf
277.2 KB
Sarah's Treatment Plan Scenario
Download the Blank Treatment Plan PDF, provided above, and
read about Sarah, a fifth grade student who seems to be
struggling in school.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 1
Continue 
 Next Slide
Have you downloaded the Blank
Treatment Plan pdf?
1
Yes- it is downloaded and I am ready for the
scenario
2
No, I have not downloaded it yet.
Scene 1 Slide 2
0 
1 
 Next Slide
 Next Slide
Sarah is a fifth grader who started the year being very open,
energetic, and excited to be at school.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 3
Continue 
 Next Slide
Recently teachers have observed quieter behavior (e.g., less
hand-raising, putting her head down in class, not talking with
friends, etc.) and lower grades in classes.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 4
Continue 
 Next Slide
Her teachers have been concerned and requested assistance from
you, the school mental health clinician.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 5
Continue 
 Next Slide
When you talk with Sarah, she mentions she has been feeling
down ever since her parents divorced last summer. She also says
she has been having difficulty sleeping  at night.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 6
Continue 
 Next Slide
Her parents say she has been irritable at home, spends most of
her time in her room, and engages with her siblings less than
before.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 7
Continue 
 Next Slide
Her mother mentions her own experience having been diagnosed
with depression when she was in college.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 8
Continue 
 Next Slide
In your conversation, you also learn Sarah is a member of the
school choir, enjoys painting in art class, and is a great caretaker
for her pets- a hamster, a beta fish, and two gerbils.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 9
Continue 
 Next Slide
How can you develop an effective and
inclusive treatment plan for Sarah?
1
2
You start by reviewing key components of mental
health treatment planning.
Tell her parents there is nothing you can do as it is
not school related.
Scene 1 Slide 10
0 
1 
 Next Slide
 Next Slide
Great job
Now that you've reviewed key components of treatment
planning, you can complete the downloaded plan template on
your own using this scenario  When you are done, keep going to
learn about other plans
START OVER
Scene 1 Slide 11
Continue 
 End of Scenario
Unique Plans in the School Setting 

Understanding and Implementing Specialized Plans for Academic
and Emotional Success 
As a school based mental health provider, or an educator, Let's reiterate your goal in the school
setting: to create a safe and supportive environment for every student where they can thrive
academically and emotionally. Remember at the beginning of the lesson it was mentioned that
no two students are alike and their needs can vary signiﬁcantly. Therefore, in your ongoing
e ort to provide the best possible support, there are a range of specialized plans designed to
address students  unique needs. These plans include interventions and accommodations,
including behavior intervention plans, functional behavioral assessments, individualized
education plans, and 504 plans. 
Let's explore various types of plans relating to student mental health that you may see in the
school setting. Some of these focus on treatment, while others focus on accommodations and
supports. Importantly, students can qualify for more than one of these plans, as well as mental
health treatment plans, at the same time. Check out this video for information about these
plans
Let's further explore these plans in detail through
written content. 
Functional Behavioral Assessments (FBA) and Behavior Intervention Plans (BIP) 

Behavior intervention plans (BIPs) are a broad category of behavior plans that aim to reduce
challenging behaviors. BIPs can be used for students with or without mental health conditions or
disabilities. They can be applied to any student to support positive behavior and to make any
changes to the learning environment to prevent problem behavior and support prosocial
behavior. BIPs are typically more formal and speciﬁc legal documents, often written by special
education teachers, behavioral specialists, or other school mental health clinicians.
On the other hand, informal behavior plans, while sharing similar goals with BIPs, offer greater
ﬂexibility in their approach and implementation. These informal plans may be developed
collaboratively among educators, counselors, and the student's support team. They may not
follow the same rigid legal requirements as BIPs but still serve as valuable tools for addressing
behavioral challenges in a student-centered way. Remember that if a student has an IEP, then the
BIP becomes a part of that document.
Both BIPs and behavior plans are informed by Functional Behavioral Assessments (FBAs). FBAs
are a method to gather information on problem behavior, such as triggers for the behavior and
any consequences that may keep the behavior happening at school. Data on the frequency,
duration, or intensity of the behavior may also be gathered. This information is then analyzed and
used to inform decisions about intervention strategies and possible replacement behaviors.
These plans will likely include: 
information about the student
the area of behavior being targeted
the function of the behavior
strategies to address the behavior, including, but not limited to, replacement behaviors,
positive reinforcement, and environmental changes.
These plans may take many different forms and may vary from school to school. The plans may
also vary depending on the goals.
Individualized Education Plans 

Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) are deﬁned by federal law. The Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA) outlines rights and educational mandates for students aged 3-21 with
disabilities. IEPs outline the services, accommodations, and goals for each student with a
disability. To qualify for an IEP, students must qualify for at least one of the 13 conditions outlined
by IDEA:
Speciﬁc learning disability including disability in the area of reading ﬂuency, reading
comprehension, math calculation, written expression, etc. 
Other health impairments can include ADHD 
Autism spectrum disorder 
Emotional disturbance includes depression, anxiety, etc. 
Speech-language impairment 
Visual impairment 
Deaf/hard of hearing
Deaf-blindness
Orthopedic impairment 
Intellectual disability 
Traumatic brain injury 
Multiple disabilities 
Developmental delay
IEPs are developed by a team of professionals (e.g., special education teachers, families, students,
general education teachers). The exact forms and procedures for IEPs can vary by district and by
school, but they all address the student's current functioning level, set annual goals, specify
services, deﬁne participation with non-disabled peers, and outline transition services for
students over the age of 13. It is extremely important for everyone involved to agree on the details
of the plan. Failure to adequately prepare or follow an IEP could result in legal action against the
school parents can ﬁle complaints, pursue mediation, and, if not resolved, ﬁle lawsuits. 
504 Plans 

504 plans are another way for schools to support students. These plans are based on Section 504
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a civil rights law for providing equal opportunities
to people with disabilities.
Unlike IEPs, 504 plans primarily focus on accommodations to level the playing ﬁeld for students.
Both plans involve collaborative development with input from families, administrators, teachers,
and mental health professionals. While IEPs encompass specialized instruction to address
academic and behavioral deﬁcits, 504 plans concentrate on accommodations.
Schools designate 504 coordinators to manage these plans, while case managers typically
oversee IEPs. Notably, 504 plans have broader eligibility criteria, encompassing anyone with a
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities. Students may qualify
for either an IEP or a 504 plan but not both concurrently.
504 plans extend beyond ages 3-18. People with disabilities can request accommodations at any
federally funded educational institution, including universities. The guidelines for this are
explained further here:
ED
Protecting Students With Disabilities
Introduction   Interrelationship of IDEA and Section 504   Protected Students 
Evaluation   Placement   Procedural Safeguards   Terminology This document
is a revised version of a document originally developed by the Chicago office of
the office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the U.S.
READ MORE ED 
You can also visually explore the distinctions and
connections between these plans by examining the
following chart.
A chart differentiating the types of plans
Key Partners in Treatment Planning 

Building Strong Partnerships: The Role of Families in Treatment
Planning 
Let's look at some of the similarities and differences between various settings and providers
that may use treatment plans.
First, review what treatment planning teams in a Multi-tiered System of Supports framework
might look like.
Click on each tab below to learn more about the
treatment planning team members.
School-based Clinicians 

School-based mental health clinicians may include school psychologists, school counselors,
guidance counselors, or other mental health professionals practicing in the school setting. They
can:
Gather data to inform treatment plans
Facilitate the writing and implementation of these plans
Provide support to other school personnel for student mental health issues.
General Education Teachers 

General education teachers are valuable sources of information about students in the classroom.
They can provide insight about academic goals, as well as strengths and challenges students may
be experiencing in the classroom.
It is also important for teachers to have an awareness of mental health challenges their students
may be facing and how to best support them. For some plans, teachers may also help implement
accommodations or some of the plan s action steps. Teachers may also make requests for
assistance for school-based mental health services. Remember that general education teachers
also implement accommodations on IEPs and 504 plans.
Special Education Teachers 

Special education teachers, with the rest of the team, develop IEPs, BIPs, and other interventions.
They can also provide valuable information about students in the classroom. They may also
support other treatment team members, like general education teachers, in implementing
accommodations and treatment plans.
Behavioral Specialists 

Behavioral specialists can also participate in developing BIPs and 504 plans, as well as assist other
treatment team members in implementation. They can provide a unique perspective informed by
their expertise in behavior management.
School Administrators 

School administrators are important to include in treatment planning teams as they may have
input about school policies and resources that can be used to best support students. Like teachers,
they may also make requests for assistance for students. School administrators frequently serve
as the local education agency (LEA) representative for IEP and 504 meetings, due to their
knowledge of available school and district resources (school psychologists are the only other
school staff who can serve as LEA representatives).
Families 

Families are essential to include in treatment planning teams. Families can provide information
about a student's background and history, observe their behavior at home, and can even partner
in the implementation of treatment plans. You will learn more the importance of involving
families later in the lesson.
What is a  request for assistance? 

Requests for assistance are similar to what is often called a  referral for services.  Using
the term  request for assistance  is more reffective of the collaborative approach used in
MTSS. In particular, a request for assistance conveys that the person with an initial concern
about a student stays with the process until the student is connected to the appropriate
level of support/intervention within the MTSS.
Student and Family Privacy and Conﬁdentiality 

Conﬁdentiality is important to consider in the context of treatment planning, especially when
working on a team with multiple professionals. Conﬁdentiality is fundamental to developing a
trusting relationship. As mental health professionals, however, you may face instances in which
you are required to share information, particularly for issues of health and safety. Two key laws
cover conﬁdentiality in school mental health: HIPAA and FERPA. HIPAA is typically applied in
private treatment settings. Most schools are covered by FERPA, but each school may be different
 check with your school to be sure you are compliant with their policy and ensure you stay up-
to-date on federal guidelines.
Review the federal guidelines in the link below.
ED
Joint Guidance on the Application of FERPA and HIPAA
to Student Health Records
The U.S. Department of Education and the office for Civil Rights at the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services released updated joint guidance
addressing the application of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA) Privacy Rule to records maintained on students.
READ MORE ED 
While treatment planning teams involve a range of professionals, it is impossible to overstate
the critical role that families play in the process. Families are not just a part of the team; they are
often the heart of it. Let's now shift the focus to explore the valuable contributions of families in
the treatment planning process and how their involvement shapes the path to success. 
Involving Families 

A father, mother, and a daughter
Family involvement is essential to the success of students in school and in treatment. As
discussed in earlier lessons, family involvement in the school is a key component of MTSS at
both the Tier 1 and Tier 2 levels. Family involvement is also extremely important in Tier 3
interventions.
As you saw earlier, parent/guardian approval is required for the beginning of treatment plans,
but is also incredibly important in building strong and impactful relationships. These
relationships can be a key strategy for increasing the effectiveness of treatment and helping
students reach their full potential (Christenson, 2019). 
Common Challenges in Family Engagement
Engagement with families is an essential part of planning treatment.
Families can provide valuable insight, support, and
recommendations in the facilitation of treatment. However, various
barriers can interfere with family involvement.
Let's explore some barrries.
Scheduling 

One difficulty with engaging  students' families is scheduling. Families may only be available outside of
regular school hours or have very limited availability. Combining this with busy provider schedules, it can
be challenging to find common ground.
Transportation and Childcare 

Another logistical challenge can be a family s access to transportation and childcare. Some families may
not have cars or the ability to drive, and public transit may be unavailable to them, making it difficult to
get to school. Some families may also be concerned about childcare and unable to leave their homes for
this reason.
Lack of Resources 

Resources can impact a school s ability to effectively collaborate with families, and a family s ability to
interact with the school. This can show up in many different ways, such as issues of transportation and
childcare discussed previously. There may also be challenges with school resources, such as low numbers
of available staff, limited time, and limited budgets. These barriers can make engaging with families more
difficult. 
Lack of Trust 

There may be ruptures in trust between the school and families for various reasons. Negative past
experiences, from both the provider and family perspective, can damage relationships. Parents may have
also had negative school experiences when they were students. Thus, schools may not be a place they seek
out. Prior communication problems may also make families more wary of connecting with the school,
and vice versa.
Stereotyping 

Stereotyping can be damaging for both families and school staff members. Families may stereotype
providers, and providers may also stereotype families. Sometimes, these can be implicit biases that
happen without our intention or awareness. It is important to reflect on stereotypes and biases and the
role they may play in school-family interactions.
Language Barriers 

Communication is key to family involvement, and language differences can be a big challenge to
overcome. One requirement of IDEA is that translators be used if requested by parents whenever possible.
It is important to utilize resources to help facilitate communication across different languages.
Click through the  ashcards below to look at some
strategies to get past the barriers that can interfere with
family involvement.
Addressing Barriers 

This involves problem-solving
with families openly about
potential barriers to their
involvement. Here, it is
important to be  exible and
adjust where possible to meet
the needs of the family. For
example, if a parent has a
dif cult time with
transportation to the school,
Rapport Builing 

Positive relationships with
families are key in promoting
their involvement. Building
rapport can begin from the  rst
interaction with the family, and
can be supported through
exibility, positive regard, and
empathetic listening. One
technique for building rapport
is to build on connections that
Mental Health Education
Helping families understand
their child s mental health
condition(s) and potential
interventions can also help
facilitate their involvement,
particularly if anyone in the
family holds negative
stereotypes about mental
health. Addressing stigma
directly can help families and
Motivational Strategies
Motivational interviewing is
another way to support
involvement with families.
Before beginning treatment, it
is important to instill hope in the
family, using a non-
confrontational approach. This
can also help to address
negative perceptions that the
family may have about
Assessment and Data-Driven Feedback 

Sharing data and assessment
results with families is another
way to promote their
involvement. Sharing this
information can also help set
positive expectations and instill
hope before and during
treatment. For example, if a
student is using a behavior
intervention plan, showing
Cultural Acknowledgement 

Cultural acknowledgment is
essential in building positive
relationships and a strong
rapport from the start of
treatment planning through all
stages of treatment. Being
inclusive, understanding, and
acknowledging and respecting
cultural differences can lead to
stronger relationships and
For more information and resources about family
engagement, explore the Family-School Community
Alliance's.
FSCA 

Proactively reach out to families to establish family-school partnerships
Empower families to reach out to professionals to engage with them in
partnership Engage families, community, and educators to identify priorities,
plan, and share in decision-making and evaluation COVID-19 Resources
Twitter feed is not available at the moment. COOKIE NOTICE.
READ MORE FSCALLIANCE 
After you use what you've learned to work through three examples of overcoming barriers to
family involvement, you ll learn more about Hart s Ladder of Participation, a way you can
conceptualize family involvement
Effectively Engaging with Families
Enhancing Treatment
Hart s Ladder of Participation
One way to consider your collaboration is by using Hart s Ladder. Hart s Ladder was originally
designed to describe child involvement in projects with adults, but it can also be applied in a
school behavioral health setting to describe the varying levels of involvement between school
treatment teams and their families.
Click on the graphic below to discover more about the
Ladder of Participation.
Level 1: Manipulation 

At the lowest level of the ladder families lack consent. Families and students do not have the course of
treatment explained to them and are not asked for consent. This constitutes an abuse of power; there is no
input into treatment at this level.
Level 2: Decoration 

This is the next level and involves a deficient level of participation. At this stage, students and families are
given some, but not all, information. Families are asked for consent at this level, but they are not involved
in any decision-making.
Level 3: Tokenism 

This level also gives very limited voice to the students and families receiving services, with little
opportunities for feedback or participation in decision-making. They are, however, given most
information and an opportunity to provide or refuse consent.
Level 4: Assigned but Informed 

Families partially participate at Level 4. Families and students are given all information and given a chance
to describe their viewpoints.
Level 5: Consulted and Informed 

At this level, family and student voices are considered in decision-making. Information is shared across all
parties, and decisions are made collaboratively. 
Level 6: School-initiated, Shared Decisions 

Needs are identified by the school, and families and students make decisions around the response to those
needs. 
Level 7: Client-initiated and Directed 

Families and students identify needs and make decisions on how to meet them. 
Level 8: Client-initiated, Shared Decisions 

Families and students initiate everything, with schools as a support as needed. 
While some rungs are lower or higher than others, it doesn t necessarily mean they are better
or worse; different levels of involvement may be needed depending on the situation (e.g., young
people might not be able to entirely make their own decisions when it comes to health and
safety issues).
Rungs 1-3 involve no active participation. Avoid these  rst three rungs if possible.
Encourage active participation of all parties to gain better rapport, better outcomes, and
family and student empowerment.
Strengths-Based vs. Deﬁcit Based Language 

When developing treatment plans, it is important to take care in choosing language to describe
difficulties students may face. In these cases, what is said can be undermined by how it is said. It
is important to use language that balances the description of students' difficulties and reasons
for treatment with respectful acknowledgment of the whole person, including strengths and
positive attributes. 
Language we use matters. Communication of behaviors and diagnoses will inﬂuence how
people respond to the information and the person. This includes the students, families, and
school-wide community. 
Using empowering language helps to reduce stigma, promote growth, and positively inﬂuence
the culture around discussions of mental health  
If we ask people to look for deﬁcits, they will usually ﬁnd them, and their view of
the situation will be colored by this. If we ask people to look for successes, they
will usually ﬁnd them, and their view of the situation will be colored by this.
Ronald Kral, School Psychologist (1989)
Watch the following video about recognizing de cit-
based or strength-based language
Now that you know a little bit more about the strengths-based approach, and how it compares
to the deﬁcit-based approach, you ll review how you can use it in more detail
One question to answer as you consider a strength-based approach is: what is a strength? This
could be deﬁned in many ways.
One example, according to Park et al. (2004), is that a strength must  be ubiquitous; be
fulﬁlling; be morally valued; be trait-like; be measurable; be distinctive; be  strikingly embodied
by some individuals; be missing altogether in some individuals; be the  deliberate target of
societal practices and rituals ; not be associated with negative antonyms; and not diminish
others or invoke jealousy.  Review the ﬂashcards to see examples of traits Park & Peterson
(2008) found to meet this deﬁnition.
Wisdom and Knowledge 

creativity, curiosity, open-
mindedness, love of learning,
perspective
Humanity 

kindness, love, social
intelligence
Temperance 

forgiveness, modesty,
prudence, self-regulation
Transcendence 

appreciation of beauty,
gratitude, hope, humor,
spirituality
Justice 
 fairness, leadership, teamwork
Courage 

honesty/authenticity, bravery,
perseverance, zest
The Behavior and Emotional Rating Scale (BERS) (Epstein, 1999) is another example of a
strengths-based approach. This formal assessment that clinicians administer to measure the
level of strength across ﬁve categories, which are listed below.
Click through the tabs to learn more about these
strengths.
Interpersonal 

These strengths revolve around student s interpersonal skills, and include items such as reacting
calmly to disappointments, admitting mistakes, delaying gratiﬁcation, apologizing when wrong,
and respecting others.
Family 

These strengths revolve around students  relationships with their families. It includes behaviors
like interacting positively with parents and/or siblings, participating in family activities, and
having a sense of belonging in their family.
School 

These strengths are focused on academic skills. They include completing homework on time,
paying attention in class, studying effectively, and participating in extra-curricular activities.
Affective 

These strengths relate to students  emotional skills. Some examples include expressing affection
for others, asking for help, identifying feelings, and sharing with others. 
Intrapersonal 

These strengths are part of the student s understanding of themselves. They include having self-
conﬁdence, identifying personal strengths, asserting oneself, and expressing a positive outlook
on life.
While both of these approaches provide examples of strengths that you may want to consider,
strengths don't need to come from formal models or assessments. You can uncover strengths
through casual conversations with students, input from family and friends, or input from other
school staff who know the student well. Here are some question examples to uncover a child's
strengths, but don't let these limit you
List of questions to uncover strengths
Deﬁcit-Based and Strengths-Based Cycles 

Another way of understanding the importance of deﬁcit-based versus strengths-based
language is by thinking about the cycles that are created with each approach. This model,
adapted from Hammond & Zimmerman (2012), describes the cycles that are created by both
deﬁcit-based and strengths-based models. Click images below to enlarge.
De cit-based Cycle 

The deﬁcit-based cycle begins with identifying a need for change, focusing on
deﬁcits. As discussed earlier, focusing on deﬁcits leads to labeling students, and this
labeling leads to negative expectations. When the process starts this way,
opportunities are blocked, and students are more likely to have a negative experience.
This negative experience then leads to further lowering of expectations and the
affirmation of labels. This leads to a reduction in self-esteem and more negative
behaviors, restarting the cycle.
Strengths-based Cycle 

The strengths-based cycle also begins with identifying a need for change. The
difference here is focusing on strengths instead of deﬁcits. After identifying
strengths, they are developed and used to create opportunities for change rather than
limiting them. The student has a more positive experience, which leads to positive
expectations and, ultimately, positive behaviors. Now that there are more positive
behaviors, the strengths cycle can continue with these new and built-up strengths.
Let's review the lesson.
Treatment plans are ways to plan the interventions and course of treatment for
students
Some common plans that you might work with in a school setting include Behavior
Intervention Plans, Individualized Education Plans, and 504 Plans
When planning treatment, it is important to involve families so that everyone gets
as much out of it as possible
Strengths-based language creates a more complete view of students and involves
indicating their strengths instead of only focusing on deﬁcits
Using strengths-based language can reduce stigma and support student's self-
esteem
EXIT



***** 
Growing Your Tier 3 Supports - 1.3
Welcome to Growing Your Tier 3 Supports  In this course, you will learn about the
interventions, best practices, and implementation of Tier 3 of Multi-tiered System
of Supports (MTSS), with a focus on supporting behavioral and mental health. Like
seeds planted in a garden, growing supports at Tier 3 creates a beautiful garden
where everyone is ﬂourishing. Let's get started
Mental Health Practices and Supports
Progress Monitoring for Practitioners in Schools

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Mental Health Practices and Supports
Outcomes: 

1. Review the beneﬁts of school-based mental health
interventions
2. Analyze the difference between manual and modular
approaches to mental health interventions
3. Review evidence-based therapies for common Tier 3 needs
4. Cover the beneﬁts and implementation of telemental health
sessions
5. Be able to identify the best intervention approach for your
school 
Mental Health Interventions in Schools 

An Introduction
As you already know, youth spend most of their time in school. Their time in school plays an
important role in their emotional, moral, and cognitive development and in forming
relationships with their peers and teachers.
All these factors affect mental health.
This means that schools are critical in supporting students  mental health. We at the SBHA
know that you want schools to be promising, supportive, safe, and non-stigmatizing
environments provide mental health support and therapeutic services to students. We do too
To help the garden of Tier 3 supports ﬂourish, we want to provide you a box of readily available
gardening tools to meet the mental health needs of all students    
In this lesson, you will brieﬂy review the beneﬁts of school-based mental health interventions,
the difference between manual-based and modular based approaches, and then focus on
speciﬁc evidence-based therapeutic practices (EBTs) before looking at telemental health care  
Ready? Let's get gardening
Effective Therapeutic Practices in School Settings 

Reviewing the Value of Therapeutic Interventions within Schools
Students experience many challenges that impact their mental health. Some of these may be
diagnoses, such as Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), anxiety, depression, or
school avoidance, as well as other social, emotional, and behavioral concerns  While supports at
Tier 1 and Tier 2 may help the student ﬁnd comfort through a safe school environment or
solidarity in a student group for grief, for example, it is the individualized, intensive supports at
Tier 3 that help students ﬂourish. You may already be familiar with applying therapeutic
approaches, or some of this may be new information. Let's get started by refreshing your
knowledge about how students beneﬁt from various evidence-based therapies (EBTs)  
Flip the cards below to check out the bene ts of using
EBTs with students  
Interpersonal Skills: 

Effective therapies positively
impact students  social and
emotional skills and improve
attitudes about self and others. 
Communication Skills 
 As students learn to express their
emotions and feelings, they
become better at identifying and
communicating their needs. They
also gain active listening skills. 
Prosocial Skills: 

Therapies enhance students
behaviors, increasing their
prosocial behaviors and their
decreasing externalizing and
internalizing problems. 
Academic Outcomes: 
 
As students have success with
therapeutic services, they are more
likely to display positive attitudes
toward school and more engagement
in their school community.
At the end of the day, the youth themselves will determine if what you provide is effective.
Feedback from students can be the most encouraging part of your work  Let's hear some now. 
Youth Voices about Therapeutic Practices 

The Youth Voices website (youth.gov) asked youth about their experiences with school mental
health services.
Let's hear Justin's, Cameron's, and Megan s stories and see how they beneﬁted from different
therapeutic services provided by their school.
Cameron's responses to questions
1. How has the school mental health program impacted you?
2. How have the school mental health counselor and the services you
received made a difference for your life?
3. If this program had not been in your school, would your life be different
now?  Would it be worse?
4. What would you say was the most helpful service to you?
5. What about this experience matters to you most?
6. If a person (teacher, principal, or a counselor) asked you if the school
mental health program should be in their school, what would you say to
them?
As Justin shared, school-based mental health services help kids who really need someone to
talk to about their intense emotions, difficult family situations, and own internal conﬂicts.
Justin s own experience with a school-based mental health counselor allowed him to ﬁnd
stability at school and happier relationships with his family. Megan s story further highlights
how important school-based mental health services are. While already seeing a psychiatrist to
aid her depression through medication, Megan couldn t see her psychiatrist daily or weekly like
she could with a school-based provider  Ultimately, Cameron summed it all up when they wrote:
Everything about it matters it  puts me in a better position for the future.  
Everything about it matters it  puts me in a better position for the future.
- Cameron, 13 years old
Think about your experiences with students. What aspects of your practice do you think were
especially helpful and supportive for them? What characteristics of a therapeutic session do you
think have impacted them the most?
Most likely, your empathy, direction, and educated skills were huge supports to your students
Thus far, the emphasis has been on the meaningfulness of effective therapeutic practices for
students. Let's see how therapeutic practices within a school can beneﬁt others alongside
students
Who Else Beneﬁts from Therapeutic Practices? 

Megan, Cameron, and Justin already gave you a sneak peek on who else beneﬁts from
therapeutic practices at a school-level: families
When families are involved with their students  mental health intervention in schools, family
communication can be improved and the wellbeing of both the student and the family can
prosper (García-Carrión et al., 2019). Further, the impact of school-based mental health
interventions is present for families and students from unique cultural backgrounds (Kern et al.,
2017).
Families aren t the only ones who beneﬁt when their student is healthy and connected.
Educators do as well  Students who are mentally well are more likely to be engaged in class,
display appropriate interpersonal behavior, actively problem-solve, and contribute to an overall
healthy school climate (Youth.Gov, n.d.). Students who engage in mental health interventions at
school tend to stabilize in their academic performance, if not improving their grades or
attendance (Jameson et al., 2013). Mentally well students are typically academically and
relationally satisﬁed students (Suldo et al., 2016), which contributes to educator satisfaction
(Admiraal et al., 2019)
Understanding Behavior 

Gardening with Knowledge
You may be wondering why we ve moved from the effectiveness of mental health interventions
in a school setting to focusing on behavior. As a school-based mental health practitioner, you
already know that one of the ﬁrst alarm ﬂares a student can send is in their behavior. You also
know that one of your primary roles is supporting positive behavior  Thus, we want to review
the function of behavior before analyzing tools you have to understand, intervene, and support
positive behavior in your students  
Think of it like knowing that plants need soil, sun, and rain to grow. Knowing this justiﬁes the
purchase of potting soil and a watering can while placing a plant by an open window  To start,
Let's review the ABCs Antecedents, Behaviors, and Consequences of behavior. 
Our ABCs 

The antecedents, behaviors, and consequences (ABCs) of a students  actions, especially
ineffective or unhealthy behavior, is a helpful tool in ﬁnding patterns that pinpoint the
behavior s root cause. While ABC data can be used within behavioral interventions to support
student s mental health, Let's ﬁrst view it as an overarching cycle of how behavior functions
before looking at using ABCs
Using the arrows below, click through to learn more
about ABCs
ABC Data
Let's look at antecedents, behaviors, and consequences.
Step 1
Antecedent 

An antecedent is something that occurs before a challenging behavior; some refer to
this as a trigger. There are many potential antecedents to behavior, so it is important
to be speciﬁc and objective when describing antecedents and consider all the
possibilities. Some examples of antecedents may include being assigned classwork,
having a toy taken away, going to a certain place, having a negative interaction with
someone, transitions, and many, many others
Step 2
Behavior 

This is where the behavior occurs  As mentioned previously, it is important to be
speciﬁc and objective when describing behavior we want to avoid stigmatizing and
vague statements such as "aggressive," "hostile," "disobedient," etc. Instead, stick
to more objective and measurable behaviors, such as "hitting classmates," "using
profanity," or "throwing toys."
Step 3
Consequence 
