Consequence 

This is the result of the behavior. What happened after the behavior? There are many
factors to include here what interactions happened, what was the child provided or
not provided access to, and who was involved? Consequences greatly impact the
likelihood of behavior happening again and help you determine the function of a
behavior.
Summary
Remember, when observing behavior of students, it's great to remember your ABCs -
Antecedents, Behaviors, and Consequences
In the ABC loop, a behavior is done to achieve a consequence. Whether it's being removed from
class before an exam due to hitting a classmate, receiving attention from peers, or getting a
special treat for exemplary behavior, a student s behavior is rarely, if ever, pointless. As a
school-based mental health practitioner, you want to encourage and respond to student s
behaviors in a way that encourages positive, healthy actions and discourages ineffective and
harmful ones. You also want the student s family to do the same for the student s behavior at
home
Click through the tabs to review ways to support or
dampen behavior, both in the school and at home. 
Positive Reinforcement 

Reinforcement is an important tool in shaping behavior, both positively and negatively.
Something is said to be reinforcing if it increases the likelihood that a behavior will occur.
Remember that for reinforcement to be most effective, it should be delivered immediately and
consistently after the desired behavior. For example, if a child completes their homework, the
teacher gives them a gold sticker. The child is excited to get this sticker, so they are more likely to
do their homework again in the future. Verbal praise can also be helpful. Suggest
parents/caregivers recognize and reinforce the behavior that they would like to see. Positive
reinforcement should be well-stated encouragement statements. For example, instead of  good
job,  recommend,  You ﬁnished your homework, great job  You can have video game time
before dinner.  This statement includes social reinforcement (attention and praise for ﬁnishing
homework), as well as a reward (video game time). 
Some more example strategies for positive reinforcement include: 
Screen time
Prizes
Access to toys
Access to preferred items
Increased attention
Playing games
Watching movies
Other preferred activities
Negative Reinforcement 

Negative reinforcement also increases the likelihood of a behavior occurring again. However, it
does this by taking away something that is undesirable. An example of this could be that a student
uses profanity when a teacher assigns them a test. The teacher then sends the student to the
office. This gets the student out of the classroom, so they don't have to take the test. This
behavior then is reinforced because the student knows that if they use profanity, they can avoid
unwanted class activities. 
Other examples of negative reinforcement include: 
Reducing demands
Providing homework passes
Reducing chores
Avoiding schoolwork 
Getting out of an undesired environment
Reducing discomfort
Positive Punishment 

Punishment is anything that reduces the likelihood of a behavior occurring again. Positive
punishment does this by adding something that is undesirable. It is important to note that it is not
recommended for positive punishments to include spanking or hitting the child, either in the
school or at home. Another disadvantage of this type of physical punishment is that it doesn t
teach the skills the child needs; it only teaches what not to do. To support positive behavior, it is
also important to provide alternate skills to children. 
Some more examples of positive punishments include: 
Assigning additional homework problems
Assigning additional chores
Flipping a card from green to red
Verbal reprimand
Negative Punishment 

Negative punishment also reduces the likelihood of a behavior occurring. However, it reduces the
likelihood by taking away something that is desired. This could look like a a parent taking away a
child's cellphone, or a student having a silent lunch period rather than talking with their friends.
Since the behavior is linked to something desired being taken away, the child is less likely to
engage in that behavior again.
Some more examples of this include: 
Active ignoring
Reducing screen time
Taking away toys
Reducing privileges
Time-outs
Environmental Modification 

Modifying the environment is a preventive strategy that can help manage antecedents. Not all
antecedents can be prevented by modifying the environment, but this can be an effective strategy
for certain types of antecedents. For example, if a child frequently engages in the behavior of
hitting classmates when they play a frustrating game, an environmental strategy could be to
reduce access to that game. 
Some more examples of environmental modiﬁcation include: 
Removing uncomfortable stimuli
Changing seating arrangements
Ensuring tasks are level-appropriate (not too easy or too difficult)
Clarifying expectations
Modifying demands
Increasing adult support during challenging tasks
Discussing changing in routine beforehand, whenever possible
An important thing to note about the difference between punishment and reinforcement is that
something may not function as you may have intended. Sometimes, consequences that are
intended to punish behavior may actually be reinforcing such as sending a student out of the
classroom for a challenging behavior during a test. What determines whether something is
punishing or reinforcing is if it increases or decreases the behavior; always be mindful to
consider observational and other data to ensure you are achieving effective outcomes. 
Now that you've reviewed the ABCs of behavior and different ways of reinforcing or diminishing
(i.e., punishing) behaviors, you can more effectively implement the gardening tools that allow
mental wellbeing and the subsequent positive behaviors to thrive. You are going to review using
the ABCs to analyze behavior before going over Functional Behavioral Analysis and Behavioral
Intervention Plans. 
Analyzing Your ABCs 

Watch the video below to review ABC data collection.
Take a minute and examine the charts below to see what ABC data
collection may look like. There are many forms that could be used for
collecting ABC data this is just one example  This version has
information included, but you can also download a blank version for
use in your school. Your district may also have forms for you to use.
Example ABC Data Collection worksheet
Blank ABC Sheet.png
108.7 KB
Let's move now from understanding and analyzing behavior to
practically putting that knowledge to use through Functional
Behavioral Assessments.
Functional Behavioral Assessment 

Before deciding which therapeutic practice or behavior management
strategy you would like to use, it is important to analyze why these
behaviors may be happening. Always remember that behavior is
predictable but changeable. If you identify the function of behaviors,
and use effective interventions, you can help students gain skills and
mindsets to change behaviors. As discussed in our "Inclusive
Treatment Planning" lesson, Functional Behavioral Assessments
(FBAs) are a tool to understand the functions of (or reasons for)
behaviors. These assessments indicate the behaviors that are
occurring (i.e., what they look and sound like), when and where they
happen, and how frequently. Then, this information is used to
determine the root causes of the behavior.
Gardening tools
FBAs are one method of gathering information about behavior and responding to it, but they are
not the only ones  Teams can often identify a student s triggers, generate a hypothesis about
the behavior rooted in observation, and make a plan with the student s educators or school-
based practitioner without going through the entire FBA process.
However, given the role FBAs have within the school setting, reviewing them is a worthwhile
process as you expand your gardening toolbox.
There are 7 steps to an FBA, and you can click through
the tabs below to learn more about each step
Step 1: Define 
Deﬁning the Target Behavior 

The ﬁrst step focuses on understanding and describing the behavior, with the goal of answering
the question: what does this behavior look like? You can deﬁne the target behavior among the
team, utilizing educator and staff observation and pre-existing data from past incidents or
overall school history. Deﬁning the target behavior is typically done in the meeting when an FBA
is ﬁrst proposed. Later on in the FBA process, if needed, interviews with students and
families/caregivers can be conducted.   When you are deﬁning the behavior, it is important to be
as speciﬁc and objective as possible. For example, instead of deﬁning the behavior as being angry
or resentful, stick to objective and measurable behaviors (e.g., high pitch screams, kicking
tables).
Step 2: Gather Information 
What Sequence of Events Predicts the Behavior? 

The second step involves understanding the sequence of the behavior, answering the question:
what sequence of events reliably predicts the behavior? 
What happens before, during, and after the behavior?
When does the behavior occur is it a certain time of day? 
Who is around the child when it happens does the behavior only occur with a particular
person? 
Where does the behavior occur is it a speciﬁc place, such as in the gym or cafeteria? A
particular class or subject? Structured or unstructured environments?
Looking at the circumstances behind the behavior and noticing patterns can help you identify
why the behavior may be occurring. At this stage, it is important to be as data-driven as possible.
Remember, data-driven decision-making is a core value of Multi-Tiered System of Supports
(MTSS)
Step 3: Hypothesize 
Generate a Hypothesis Statement 

At this step, based on the deﬁned target behavior and gathered information, develop a hypothesis
that describes the function of the behavior, or the reason you think the target behavior occurs.
The goal question here is: why is this behavior happening? For example, a hypothesis for a
student might sound like this:  When Bob's teacher gives him independent work, he will start
screaming loudly and kicking the doors in order to get attention  (summarizing the function). 
There are several common functions of behavior to consider: 
Attention: to get any attention or acknowledgment from another person, whether that be
caretakers, family, friends, teachers, or peers. Remember, this can include both positive and
negative attention. 
Escape: to avoid an undesired task, situation, or person. In a school setting, students may
want to avoid certain classes or academic assignments. 
Sensory Needs: to experience something pleasant or to avoid something unpleasant. For
example, a student with an autism spectrum disorder may self-stimulate through rocking
or hand ﬂapping. Another student might cover their ears because something is too loud. 
Access: to get something desired (e.g., games, toys, food, etc.). For example, a student
might complete their classwork because the teacher is giving everyone free time on the
computer when they are done
Step 4: Competing Pathways 
Building a Competing Behavior Pathway 

In this step, you can use your hypothesis and information about the behavior to determine how to
best address it. The goal here is to build an effective plan with speciﬁc components that promote
positive behaviors and reduce problem behaviors. One way to do this is with a competing
pathway: replacing a problem behavior with a more positive one. For example, we know that Bob
has been screaming loudly because he would like to receive the teacher's attention: a behavior
pathway could look like Screams    Attention. To support positive behavior, we can teach Bob to
raise his hand for attention instead. Then, the pathway becomes Raises hand    Attention.
Another helpful way to build a competing behavior pathway is to pair the undesired or less
preferred activity with a more desired or preferred activity. When a student knows that by
completing their homework while in class (i.e., less preferred activity) will lead to being able to
chat with friends or leave class (i.e., more preferred activity), they are more likely to do the less
desired activity  This is called the Premack Principle, and you can learn more about it at the
following link: https://besdc.com/premack-principle-a-tool-to-help-your-kids-to-start-or-
ﬁnish-an-activity/
Step 5: Plan BIP 
Design a Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP) 

In this step, the goal is to develop a plan for behavior management strategies. Behavior
Intervention Plans (BIPs) use the results of FBAs to create a plan for supporting positive behavior.
In these plans, you can include two types of strategies: preventive and function/consequence. 
Preventive strategies include steps to make the problem behavior irrelevant: for example, if a
student leaves their desk frequently when a class assignment is too easy, then teachers can
increase the difficulty of that assignment. 
Function/Consequence strategies include steps to make the behavior ineffective. For example, if
a student is screaming to get attention, not responding to the scream while responding to raised
hands or requests for attention can make the screaming less effective and less desirable. Teams
often develop more comprehensive prevention strategies to stop problem behaviors before they
start and build opportunities for students to experience success.
Step 6: Implement BIP 
Plan for Implementation of the BIP 

This step involves a plan for implementing the BIP. For example, which behaviors will the student
replace, and what new skills does the student need to be able to replace the problem behaviors?
This is an important stage of the BIP process because team members need to understand how the
plan will look in real life. In addition, teachers typically implement the bulk of the plan, with
support from school mental health staff, administrators, or other educators. For example, if our
plan is to increase the difficulty of a student's work to decrease boredom, teachers will need to
implement this, so it is important they are a part of the MTSS team and assist in developing the
BIP. Team meetings can help facilitate this stage  Family members will also need to know how
they can support the plan at home. For example, some families choose to offer rewards at home
to reinforce positive behaviors at school. 
Step 7: Monitor BIP 
BIP Monitoring & Modiﬁcation 

This step involves strategies for monitoring, next steps, and creating action plans of the BIP that
you have developed. Once a BIP is developed, teams usually set a timeline for taking data and
reconvening to review progress. Again, this is a great place to be as data-informed as possible
Use progress monitoring to check in to see how the plan is going. What is going well? What might
not be effective, and how could it be modiﬁed? This will help ensure that improving behavior
continues to be supported over time.
Although the basics of FBAs and BIPs were brieﬂy covered, it is
important to acknowledge that many students presenting with Tier 3
needs may have already had an FBA when their needs were not as
signiﬁcant (e.g., Tier 2 needs). As the school-based mental health
practitioner, you may already have insight into the motivators of the
challenging behavior. Your treatment plan may incorporate an
existing BIP focused on preventive strategies to modify the problem
behavior. However, if new problem behaviors arise, it is best practice
to conduct a new FBA and develop a corresponding BIP, if needed.
Whether the intervention is built on an existing or a new BIP, the
plan should speciﬁcally summarize and answer the following
questions:
FBA Questions on a Checklist
While FBAs often result in BIPs, this is not always the case. Instead, changes to
Individual Education Program (IEPs), 504 accommodations, and classroom behavior
plans are other responses to an FBA.
Person surrounded by heart, brain, text bubble
As mentioned in earlier lessons, family involvement is also very
important  Mental health struggles that affect behavior not only
impacts students  school performance, but they also inﬂuence
students  relationships with others, especially their
parents/caregivers.
Knowing the great impact of family/caregiver involvement in
therapies, you recognize the importance of interacting with
parents/caregivers to understand the function of their student s
behavior. In therapeutic practices, it may not be enough to teach
skills and strategies to overcome adversity for improved wellbeing
and mental health these skills and strategies may not be effective
without family input. Therefore, you should also teach
parents/caregivers evidence-based skills.
Following a plan for responding to pre-deﬁned behaviors can also be
used at home to foster strong child-parent/caregiver relationships in
a safe and stable home environment. When parents/caregivers know
how to appropriately respond to the child s challenging behavior,
they are more likely to prevent the occurrence of this behavior and
guide the child in making better decisions. Successfully supporting
behavioral changes is more likely when every parent/caregiver is
involved. This means that every e ort should be made to involve
family members when teaching behavioral skills.
For example, you can teach parents about positive reinforcement,
what you reviewed earlier  Positive reinforcement is one of the
strongest motivating operations to have positive behavior repeated.
When parents/caregivers follow a behavior with praise or reward, the
student is more likely to repeat the positive behavior. Over time,
positive reinforcement will encourage positive behavior change.
Mother showing daughter vegetables
Download the document below for more behavior
management strategies that you can share with families
and caregivers and use in the classroom as well.
Positive Solutions for Families.pdf
237.9 KB
For a deeper dive into the FBA and BIP process,
download the PBIS Center's guide below and sample
FBA and BIP templates.
Tier 3 Brief Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA) Guide.pdf
1.1 MB
FunctionalBehaviorAssessment.docx
25.1 KB
Behavior-Intervention-Plan-form.docx
40.2 KB
After this  , you will examine various effective practices to expand your
gardening toolbox. First, you ll start with understanding the different approaches to mental
health interventions by reviewing the difference between manual and modular-based
approaches. 
Intervention Approaches & Implementation 

Reviewing the Foundation of Tier 3 Supports in Detail
Tier 3 supports are as diverse as the different types of plants one can grow in a garden  You may
be familiar with several evidenced-based therapeutic practices but the needs you address and
the services you provide in a private or clinical mental health setting can look very different
from those same needs and services within the district, the school, and the classroom. Knowing
what support is best served where and when is much like gardening.
Diverse ﬂowers
You may prefer planting and growing perennials like the daylily, a ﬂower that blooms every year.
You may want to experiment with different plants in each season, like tomatoes in the summer
and squash in the fall. Growing herbs may be more your speed compared to planting an orchard.
Alongside what you want to plant, you must consider your climate, soil, and capabilities. This
lesson is here to help you discern what supports are best cultivated within your speciﬁc context
First, you will review modular and manual-based approaches to Tier 3 interventions, and then
you ll review evidence-based practices speciﬁcally before ﬁnishing the lesson out with a special
look at telemental health. Let's go
Manual Approaches to Mental Health 

Approaching mental health interventions by using a manual as a guide is what makes an
intervention a  manual approach . Manuals allow for consistency, standardization, and are
rooted in empirical evidence.
Book in ﬂowers
Imagine the manual approach to a mental health intervention as a highly speciﬁc gardening
guide that provides insight on what to plant when, how many seeds to put in each hole in the
ground, how often to water, and how much growth should be seen each week. 
When deﬁning the role of treatment manuals in training and clinical settings, most clinicians
and researchers agree that treatment manuals are an essential piece of evidence-based therapy.
But how does this approach translate to the school setting?
Watch this video to learn more about manual
approaches to treatment, with a focus on school
settings
As you learned in the video, using manuals when approaching treatment came out of a desire to
ﬁght inconsistencies in treatment and provide more routine care. Examples of manual
approaches are the Coping Cat for depression and anxiety or When Children Refuse: A Cognitive
Behavior Approach for behavior and aggression.
School-based mental health practitioners are responding to
the full range of presenting child and adolescent psychological
disorders. Intervention manuals provide them with the
necessary structure and guidelines to address diverse
treatment targets with proven methods. 
The use of manuals in mental health interventions can help a clinician avoid bias for or against a
particular therapy, provides clarity against a backdrop of many types of therapy, and holds
practitioners to higher professional standards. They are also helpful in training clinicians and
building their conﬁdence (Wilson, 1996). However, treatment manuals do not come without a
fair share of challenges. When you use a manual for treatment, you may ﬁnd that (Marshall,
2009): 
The standardization of manuals impedes ﬂexibility in the session
The manuals are not all-encompassing of the unique idiosyncrasies of a student
Manuals become a "crutch" or a block in the session
Within schools speciﬁcally, administering manual-based mental health interventions can be
difficult due to (Lyon et al., 2013):
Lack of parental or caregiver engagement with the intervention
Barriers to transportation and timing (e.g., operating strictly within school hours)
Inadequate resources available to purchase manuals and train clinicians in a manual
Lack of support from administrators and educators
Because of this, a modular approach to mental health intervention has been suggested as it may
prove more effective in the school setting. Let's take a look now  
Modular Approaches 

Modularity refers to breaking down more complex activities into smaller pieces that may
function independently. In other words, there are  modules  that connect but do not rely on
each other in order to be functional.
The modular approach consists of a guided combination of individually scripted techniques that
are explicitly matched to the child's individual strengths and needs.
Content modules contain information related to therapeutic activities like procedural
descriptions in a treatment manual (Chorpita et al., 2005). However, because the  modules  can
operate on their own in any order, the modular approach can be more ﬂexible than a manual-
based one. Whereas a clinician would need to follow each step in a manual s procedural
guideline, they can use the modules to ﬂex around their student s need or circumstances more
organically. 
The modular design offers numerous potential advantages in terms of design efficiency and
effectiveness all while maintaining efficacy: results from a yearlong evidenced-based modular
approach among school practitioners show that the modular approach may ﬁt well within the
school mental health context (Lyons et. al., 2017). 
Efficiency refers to the ability of a protocol to be designed or re-designed
with reduced time or cost 
Effectiveness refers to the ability of a protocol to be generalizable or
feasible in real-world contexts (adaptable) 
Efficacy refers to the ability of a protocol to achieve its desired effect or
outcome
The modular approach is designed to be highly individualized. For example, one student may
need a few sessions while another student may need more; or one student may need to have
parents incorporated into the treatment sessions while another student may not. 
Because the modular approach can sound very ﬂuid, Let's look at a few speciﬁc approaches in
more detail to ground our understanding
Modular Approach to Therapy for Children with
Anxiety, Depression, Trauma, and Conduct Disorder 
The Modular Approach to Therapy for Children with Anxiety, Depression, Trauma, and Conduct
Disorder (MATCH-ADTC) is a redesign of evidence-based treatments of some of the most
common childhood mental health challenges. The system has been tested in community
mental health settings and has been found highly effective  MATCH-ADTC provides step-by-
step instructions, scripts, handouts, and more to make clinical work more effective.   
It is a component of the PracticeWise platform, which is a proprietary internet-based tool
providing services that help clinicians and organizations improve the quality of health care for
children and adolescents.
To learn more about PracticeWise, click the link below
to visit their website. 
PracticeWise   Welcome
PracticeWise is dedicated to improving human health and welfare through the
use of evidence and information technology to advance behavioral health care.
PracticeWise strives to apply scientiﬁc principles in all its endeavors and to
pursue research and evaluation to promote continued development of
behavioral health services.
READ MORE PRACTICEWISE 
MATCH-ADTC was developed to address several challenges with implementing manual based
approaches in  real world  settings, including schools. Because most manuals are designed for
single disorders or homogeneous clusters, they may not ﬁt the heterogeneous caseloads and
symptom comorbidity that many school-based practitioners see. 
In contrast, MATCH-ADTC was designed to provide: 
Multi-problem intervention components
Coverage of common forms of comorbidity and co-occurring problems
Strategies to shift in response to ﬂuctuating treatment needs
Finally, MATCH-ADTC builds upon techniques found in a range of manuals. Therefore, learning
this system may be an efficient way for clinicians to expand their skills and reduce their need
for multiple trainings in various manual-based approaches    
If you are interested in MATCH-ADTC Online, you can
visit the attached link for a demonstration
PracticeWise
Bruce F. Chorpita, Ph.D. University of California, Los Angeles John R. Weisz,
Ph.D., ABPP Harvard University and Judge Baker Children's Center This
demonstration site provides you an opportunity to review the basic functioning
of the full MATCH-ADTC site.
READ MORE PRACTICEWISE 
Another part of PracticeWise, the Managing and Adapting Practice (MAP) system is designed to
build evidence-informed treatment through the application of a variety of professional
development supports and clinical tools. Major components of MAP include:
A computerized PracticeWise database of evidence-based services that contains
information therapists use to select treatment modules that have the strongest
evidence for being helpful for a particular presenting problem
A set of easy-to-use practice guides for each treatment module with step-by-step
instructions for implementing the key elements
A dashboard tracking system to monitor the use of treatment elements and track a
student s clinical course using standardized and ideographic measures 
The MAP Professional Development Program which structures training and support
for organization and delivery
A therapist portfolio, including records of learning and direct service goals and
performance standards for MAP trainees
Check out other modular approaches by clicking
through the tabs below
UNIFIED PROTOCOL FOR TRANSDIAGNOSTIC TREATMENT OF DIAGNOSTIC DISORDERS 

The Uniﬁed Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders was developed by
David Barlow and a team of researchers at the Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders (CARD) at
Boston University. This protocol is a form of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) that is primarily
used with adults with anxiety, depression, and related disorders; however, this modular approach
has also been developed for children and adolescents, particularly in the areas of how parent-
child relational problems and the family unit impact the child s emotional experiences.
Visit the Uniﬁed Protocol website to subscribe and receive the most up-to-date information on
this treatment.
BUILDING CONFIDENCE 

Building Conﬁdence is a modular cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) program for children with
anxiety disorders. The format consists of individual child therapy, combined with parent training
and involvement.
To read more information and peer-reviewed research on the Building Conﬁdence program
follow this link.
MINDFULNESS MATTERS PROGRAM 

The Mindfulness Matters Program is an adaptable, modular approach to teaching mindfulness to
children and teenagers (Semple & Willard, 2019). It is designed to be implemented in a variety of
settings, including schools. With the purchase of the book, online resources are available for
download, including printable handouts. 
Here is a link to the book s publisher if you are interested: https://www.guilford.com/books/The-
Mindfulness-Matters-Program-for-Children-and-Adolescents/Semple-
Willard/9781462539307
With this knowledge of manual vs. modular approaches, you could understandably be asking,
Which one? . Let's ﬁgure that out next
Picking the Best Intervention for You 

Picking an intervention for a client, let alone for a school or district, can be difficult  Within a
school setting, you and your school team need to identify the intended population's baseline
severity, risk factors, and existing problems as well as district resources and supports to adapt
the most effective treatment approaches. That s a lot but don't worry. There are resources that
can guide you in this process
As beneﬁcial as school-based psychological
interventions may be, it can be challenging for school
psychologists and other school personnel to select the
most appropriate ones, and to adapt them to the realities
of the school environment.
Dennis J Simon, Clinical & School Psychologist
Planning Realistic Implementation and Maintenance by
Educators (PRIME) 

PPRIME is a guide on how to select an evidenced based intervention. It was developed by the
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. This prerequisite guide outlines a
simple, four-step process for selecting evidence-based interventions to address speciﬁc
student concerns.
1
2
3
4
Identify the issue of concern, collect baseline data, and develop goals.
Search the Internet, books, and primary resources for interventions.
Consider beneﬁts and disadvantages of intervention options.
Select an appropriate evidence-based intervention.
Download the PDF below for the complete PRIME guide.
PRIME_quickguide_edvidence-based_intervention.pdf
271 KB
The book School Centered Interventions: Evidence-Based Strategies for Social, Emotional, and
Academic Success by Dennis J Simon presents a practical framework for delivering school-
centered interventions that effectively target the most common psychological, social, and
learning problems experienced by children and adolescents from externalizing and
internalizing disorders to the challenges posed by ADHD and autism spectrum disorders.
...School-centered therapy is the most effective format for addressing social,
emotional, and behavioral issues for children and adolescents.
-  Dennis J. Simon, Clinical & School Psychologist
For each symptom proﬁle, the author examines the diagnostic and developmental
considerations, the empirically supported intervention strategies, instructional supports, crisis
intervention protocols, and required family and systemic supports.  The ﬁrst part of the book
showcases the value of mental health work in schools while the second part covers up-to-date
mental health interventions.
We've provided a link to the book's publisher below
School-Centered Interventions: Evidence-Based
Strategies for Social, Emotional, and Academic Success
(Applying Psychology in the Schools)
This book presents a practical framework for delivering therapeutic and
instructional interventions in schools. Readers will learn how to select
evidence-based interventions and make appropriate adaptations for the school
context. School is where therapeutic services for children and adolescents are
most commonly delivered.
READ MORE INDIECOMMERCE 
Here is a link to a PDF of the book's introduction as well.
Loading
When deciding between manual or modular interventions, remind yourself that regardless of
what ﬁt is best for your school, you re still picking an empirically based intervention that can
support students in their journey to being happier, healthier people.
Effective Interventions for Tier 3 Supports 

The Supports You're Growing
In this section, you ll review different therapeutic strategies you can implement at the Tier 3
level.
Think of it like browsing your local nursery. Each plant is unique, serves a different purpose, and
ultimately adds to its environment
Before you review speciﬁc Tier 3 supports, we at the SBHA want to remind you, ultimately, what
you re doing: you are promoting resiliency among your students through these Tier 3
interventions. Let's focus on that concept in a little more detail now.
Resiliency 

Below are three videos from Harvard University on
what resilience is, the science behind it, and how it can
be built
Multiple deﬁnitions of resilience were mentioned throughout all three videos, but they all boil
down to this: resilience is the ability to maintain balance between the challenging and
rewarding experiences life throws at you. While resiliency starts in genetics, it grows and molds
based on experiences especially through primary relationships of care and love. As you recall
from the video, those relationships ideally include family but are not limited to one s caregivers
or siblings.
You can be one of the people that builds resiliency among students by
your care for them.
Promoting resiliency may sound like a nebulous, intangible task, but it is really what you re
already doing as a supportive adult working with youth. You are teaching students to recognize
and name their emotions, to problem solve difficult relational conﬂicts, and to think through
long-term plans and goals and how their current actions align with them. We at the SBHA are
so thankful for the work you re already doing
With this  big picture  perspective on what you re doing in mind, Let's examine a variety of
EBTs, many of which you may already be familiar with  If you are, think of this as a brief review.
Evidence-Based Therapeutic Interventions 
Click through the tabs to review EBTs
Introduction
As you click through the arrows, think through your own students and what needs they
have  You may just ﬁnd inspiration for new supports to plant at your school
EBT 1
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) 

Cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT, is a widely used effective practice to treat
mental health needs including depression, anxiety, PTSD, and stress. It comes in
manual (e.g.,  standard ) or modular forms, with manual CBT being more formalized
while modular CBT is more ﬂexible. CBT looks at students  feelings, thoughts, and
behaviors and works to understand how all these interact with one another. It helps
clients to change or adapt the their thought patterns that lead to maladaptive
behaviors and feelings. In a CBT intervention with the student, you would identify
behaviors that are causing problems and set goals to focus on more helpful thoughts.
CBT is effective in school settings because it helps students develop strategies to
solve problems, regulate emotions, and engage in desired behavior. You can even
suggest CBT worksheets to teachers for use in their classrooms.
EBT 2
Trauma-Focused CBT (TF-CBT) 

Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, or TFCBT, addresses mental health
needs of clients who are impacted by trauma. The goal is to help clients to not only
deal with negative thoughts, feelings, and behaviors but to feel safe and stabilized
while processing their trauma experience. During TFCBT sessions you help the
student learn skills to manage and tolerate difficult emotions like fear and worry. You
empower their voices by modeling that talking about what happened actually lowers
the emotions when remembering the trauma experience or being reminded of the
trauma experience, and ultimately assist your client in gaining perspective about the
trauma experience which helps to put it into the past.
EBT 3
Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) 

Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) focuses on improving the quality of the
parent-child relationship and changing parent-child patterns to promote a healthy
family relationship. Overall, PCIT aims to reduce negative behavior and interactions
by enhancing child and parent or caregiver attachment. Caregivers are deeply
integrated in the treatment with their child in PCIT.  As the practitioner, you act as a
coach for the caregiver, helping them to adopt additional skills in an experiential
learning environment to support reduction of maladaptive behaviors, and increase
relational connectedness with their children.
EBT 4
Functional Family Therapy (FFT) 

Functional Family Therapy (FFT) is a short-term therapy that is used to treat
externalizing behaviors, substance use, truancy, and delinquency behaviors in youth
aged 11 to 18. A FFT intervention includes the adolescent and their parents or
caregivers. During the intervention, together, you would focus on a change in the
family. It teaches behavioral change skills so that youth can make more thoughtful
choices in the future.  Typically, FFT goes through ﬁve phases: engagement (i.e.,
building trust with the family), motivation (i.e., encouraging the family s belief that
change is possible), relational assessment (i.e., analyzing family interactions and
functions), behavior change (i.e., reducing ineffective behaviors through skill
development), and generalization (i.e., expanding behavioral improvements to
multiple settings).
EBT 5
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) 

Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) helps to treat depression, anxiety, and eating
disorders by  exploring and improving students  interpersonal relationships and
social functioning. IPT s root principle is that psychological phenomena or
symptoms , like depression, are a response to interpersonal dysfunction. Thus, IPT
focuses on current issues rather than reviewing childhood or past dilemmas. IPT
typically focuses on one of four common challenges: relational conﬂict, life changes,
grief and loss, and issues start or maintaining relationships. As the practitioner, you
would help the student create a log of their most important relationships, also known
as an interpersonal inventory, and then grouping their relationship in the
aforementioned problem areas. You would then help the student develop solutions to
the problems and implement them in real life.
EBT 6
Emotion Focused Therapy (EFT) 

Emotion Focused Therapy (EFT) is effective for the treatment of depression, anxiety,
and post-traumatic stress. In EFT interventions, you will be working with students on
how to express and explore their emotions. Understanding emotions enables students
to be aware of when to follow adaptive emotions, how to attend to maladaptive
emotions, and how to self-regulate when emotional states become too much to
handle in the moment. EFT helps clients to recognize that they can tolerate, and not
avoid, difficult emotional states. EFT considers the understanding, awareness, and
acceptance of emotion as central to lasting client change.
EBT 7
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) 

Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) is an action-oriented practice. In this
therapeutic practice, you would assist students in reducing or eliminating avoidance,
denial, and struggles related to emotional states. You are teaching them the skills to
accept these emotions while guiding them forward with their lives. ACT is generally
used to treat anxiety, depression, stress, and substance use. Mindfulness is a key part
of ACT, and you will review it in greater depth later in this lesson
EBT 8
Dialectical Behavior Therapy 

Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) was originally developed to treat more complex
disorders, speciﬁcally Borderline Personality Disorder, and those at high risk of
suicide. Over the years, DBT progressed as an effective treatment for treat other
disorders including, but not limited to, behavioral disorders related to emotion
dysregulation, binge eating, and depression. DBT is designed to help clients build a
meaningful life based on their personal values. Traditional DBT includes individual
therapy, psychoeducational skills coaching, and group therapy. DBT is valuable in the
school setting as a mechanism to teach coping, communication, and emotional
regulation skills which align with broader social, emotional, and behavioral skills
taught in academic settings.
EBT 9
Solution-Focused Brief Therapy (SFBT) 

Solution-Focused Brief Therapy (SFBT) is a short term focused therapeutic approach.
SFBT has a strong emphasis on empowerment and change. SFBT focuses on solutions,
rather than problems. It is helpful in the areas of behavioral and emotional issues,
social skills, academic outcomes, and dropout prevention. SFBT traditionally includes
3 components for interacting with students over a limited period:
1.  Start a conversation around the student s problems or concerns.
1. Have conversations on co-constructing (i.e., working together to create) new
meanings for the student s presenting concerns. 
1. Help student to co-construct a vision to overcome the identiﬁed problems and
concerns.
This process involves creating a detailed image of what the student s life will look like
without the problem, exploring past attempts at solving the problem, and identifying
goals with the student that allow them to align their next steps with their overarching
values
Summary
Well done
Phew  That is a lot of information. don't stress about trying to remember it all we've created a
downloadable PDF that recaps everything, as well as two other resources that both review
therapies based on need
Download the PDF below for a recap of the EBTs you
just read about and click the link for a "menu" of EBTs
based on need
Summary of Therapies.pdf
264.3 KB
Blue Menu of Evidence-Based Interventions
PracticeWise is dedicated to improving human health and welfare through the
use of evidence and information technology to advance behavioral health care.
PracticeWise strives to apply scientiﬁc principles in all its endeavors and to
pursue research and evaluation to promote continued development of
behavioral health services.
READ MORE PRACTICEWISE 
If you would like to know more about each individual
therapy, click through the image below and follow their
links
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)
More resources on CBT can be found in this link
CBT worksheets to use in their classrooms
Solution-Focused Brief Therapy (SFBT)
For a deeper dive, visit this link
Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (TFCBT)
Resources and workbooks on TFCBT can be found in this link
Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT)
Visit  PCIT for more information
Functional Family Therapy (FFT)
Visit FFT more information
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT)
For a deeper dive, visit IPT
Emotion Focused Therapy (EFT)
More resources and EFT training information can be found here
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT)
To learn more about the application of ACT, please visit this link
Modular Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
For more about modular CBT, check out these tools
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT)
For more information on DBT training, please check out this link.
If you want to, feel free to take a break before we move into Motivational Interviewing and
mindfulness as two other Tier 3 supports you can grow
Motivational Interviewing 

Motivational Interviewing (MI) supports change in behavior/action that is usually the most
difficult to modify by helping students ﬁnd the internal motivation to change their behavior  MI
was originally developed to help people su ering from substance use, but it is also used to treat
social, emotional, and behavioral difficulties.
You, as the practitioner, guide students in committing to change. Empathy is at the core of MI.
By being empathetic, you can engage with students in conversations about behavior that lead to
lasting change. 
When using MI with students, understanding the student s values is key to setting clear goals
and working towards them.
Here is an activity you can use with your students to
help them clearly identify and de ne their values  
Value Card Sort Exercise
READ MORE OHSU 
To guide changes in behavior, MI uses the OARS technique:
Open-Ended Questions:  these are your classic  Who, Why, What, When, Where
type questions that require more than a simple  yes  or  no  response from the
student. 
affirmation: You are acknowledging the student s difficulties and their hard work
to overcome them with speciﬁc positive phrases (e.g.,  You worked very hard on
your paper for English II and did so well ) compared to general praise (e.g.,  Good
job ). 
Reﬂection: This is also known as reﬂective listening, which you learned about in
our  Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance  lesson
Summarizing: When you summarize what a student has said, you repeat what the
student told you back to them in your own words, ensuring that you both are on the
same page.
Download this PDF for more information on OARS and
MI
OARS in Motivational Interviewing.pdf
132.1 KB
Mifican be used in a variety of contexts, and can be used to help students work through the next
support: mindfulness
Mindfulness 

The purpose of mindfulness is to develop a perspective on one s consciousness and identity
that can lead to a better mental state and peace. Not only that, but mindfulness is also
tremendously helpful in reducing depression, stress, anxiety, and pain (Carsley et al., 2018;
Hilton et al., 2017; Kallapiran et al., 2015; Spijkerman et al., 2016).
You can consider mindfulness as a therapeutic practice similar to CBT or FFT. When we are
talking about mindfulness, we are not only referring to an intervention focused on stress
management skills. Under a bigger umbrella, it is an intervention that focuses on the mind and
body connection. For example, it includes working with students on their nutrition, exercise,
sleep, stress management, and screen time reduction. That s why mindfulness is also a
fantastic tool for everyone, not just students in need of Tier 3 supports  
Mindfulness is a way of befriending ourselves and our
experience.
Jon Kabat-Zinn, founder of Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction Clinic & Professor emeritus at the
University of Massachusetts Medical School
Mindfulness helps students improve their mental health focus and self-awareness. The two key
components of mindfulness are awareness and acceptance. 
affirmation: Having the ability to focus attention on the present moment.
Acceptance: Being able to stay in the moment/present and accept what is going on,
rather than worrying about  what if  scenarios, digging into the past, or worrying
about the future.
Mindfulness is not the absence of any thoughts or feelings; instead, it is
the acceptance of them.
In therapeutic practices, using mindfulness techniques teaches students how to engage in the
present moment and escape from negative thoughts that cause students to feel anxious,
stressed, or depressed. You can see how it works in the scenario below
Tara scenario
Mindfulness is one of the best practices to use in situations like
Tara's.
Practicing mindfulness will direct her attention away from stress and negative thoughts and
allow her to focus on the present moment. By being mindful of the present, whether through
using her ﬁve senses or focusing on breathing, Tara can pull her mind out of the future worries
about college and school and out of the past frustrations with her mom to just the here and now.
Once present, Tara can more adeptly break down her to-do list with calm and a healthier level of
stress rather than sheer panic. 
Mindfulness, overall, will help students like Tara to support their mental health by learning to
focus attention on the present moment.     
Mindfulness Practices 

One of the beneﬁts of mindfulness is that it can be practiced anywhere, anytime. Nowadays,
even our phones can send us a notiﬁcation to practice mindfulness for at least a minute a day  
Let's  ip through the cards below to remember some
simple ways that you can include mindfulness in your
day
Taking a Mindful Walk 

Whether in a beautiful garden,
your living room, or on your
route from your car to the
grocery store, you can practice
mindfulness by simply focusing
on the experiencing of walking:
how your feet feel on the
ground, the muscle movements
that allow you to keep your
balance, the sounds around
Self-Acceptance 

A key part of mindfulness is
avoiding judgements or labels
on how one thinks or feels. You
can practice mindfulness by
paying attention to your
thoughts; if you notice an
adverb or adjective (e.g.,
good ,  bad ,  waste of time ,
stupid ,  the best ) being
attached to how you are feeling
The Five Senses 

This is a popular mindfulness
exercise, and if you try it, you
will quickly see why  The Five
Senses exercise can be
practiced in virtually any
scenario. For this exercise, you
can verbally or mentally
acknowledge  ve things you
can see, four things you can
feel, three things you can hear,
There are plenty of mindfulness resources you can use in your own life and that you can help
students implement in theirs. We ve attached a few below
Click through the resources below
HEADSPACE
Meditation and Sleep Made Simple - Headspace
Live a healthier, happier, more well-rested life in just a few minutes a day with
the Headspace app.
READ MORE HEADSPACE 
3 Free Mindfulness Tools
Download These 3 Mindfulness Tools (PDF, normally $27) For Free This Week.
100% Science-Based. Used By Professionals.
READ MORE POSITIVEPSYCHOLOGY.COM 
32 Mindfulness Activities to Help You Find Calm at Any
Age
Only have 5 minutes? Try these mindfulness activities when you're cooking,
walking, hanging with the kids, and more.
READ MORE HEALTHLINE 
51 Mindfulness Exercises for Kids in the Classroom -
Waterford.org
Use these 51 mindfulness activities to help children recognize and manage their
thoughts, emotions, and actions-all important SEL skills.
READ MORE WATERFORD.ORG 
Mindfulness is not a one-step solution. It takes practice
Tips for Therapeutic Treatments 

Additional Considerations
We just described multiple therapeutic practices to meet the varying mental health needs of
students. Given what you have learned, is it possible to ﬁnd one therapy that can meet the needs
of every student?
The answer is  No,  one size does not ﬁt all. Every student is different, and each student s
needs vary based on their experiences and background. This means that if a particular therapy is
effective for Jessica, the same therapy may not be effective for Kendra. There are also
considerations of how developmentally appropriate each therapeutic strategy/practice is for a
student. Therapy for a 6th grader can be vastly different than one for an 11th grader  
Click through the scenario below to see how individual
differences matter when providing effective therapies. 
Scenario Presentation:
Qian is a 10-year-old boy in the third grade who has had difficulty making and
keeping friends since ﬁrst grade. Recently his attendance at school has become
problematic.
Step 1
Student Referral: 

Qian s teacher requested assistance from the school psychologist (SP) because she
noticed that Qian displayed signs of anxiety and stress, and his attendance and
learning outcomes were becoming low. The school psychologist contacted Qian s
parents who also conﬁrmed Qian s depression and unwillingness to go to school.
Step 2
Assessment: 

Qian and his parents were interviewed separately. Qian explained that he feels anxious
when he tries to join a group of peers at recess. He also feels shy and afraid to initiate
conversations with individual peers, because he is worried that others will make fun
of him. He wants to make and keep friends.
Step 3
Treatment: 

The SP decided to use cognitive behavioral therapy. This way, Qian would be able to
identify his thoughts and feelings and learn to replace negative thoughts with
positive ones and display the results in his behavior. The SP used action ﬁgures to help
with role play.
Summary
The SP conducted a thorough assessment of Qian s concerns through interviews with
Qian and his parents. CBT has proven to be effective across a wide variety of
demographics and helpful in effectively addressing anxiety and depression in children
and youth.  Given Qian s age, she chose role playing with toys to keep Qian engaged in
addressing his thought and feelings.
Keeping therapies age-appropriate and matched to the student s needs is the ﬁrst step in
delivering effective Tier 3 supports, but they aren t the only ones.
Relationships in Effective Therapeutic Practices 

You may remember from our "Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance" lesson where we
emphasized the importance of empathy, strong bonds, and positive relationships with
students, that the core component of effective therapeutic practices is the positive relationship
you develop with your student. it's also, as you learned earlier, key to promoting resiliency  
As we mentioned in previous lessons, this positive relationship is fundamental to the youth s
overall well-being. This means that for us and our students to get the most out of therapeutic
practices, we must start with bonding and forming a relationship. In some cases, we may
already have this relationship. If so, we need to look for ways to enhance this relationship so
that students can trust us and feel safe and empowered to talk about their problems. 
Carl Rogers
Carl Rogers, one of the primary founders of  humanistic psychology, once suggested that six
conditions must exist for constructive personality change to happenthrough strong
relationships.
Consider these six conditions by  ipping through these
ashcards
Psychological Contact
The practitioner and student
are in agreed upon contact.
The Student
The student is anxious,
distressed, and vulnerable.
The Practitioner The practitioner is congruent,
genuine, and real. 
Unconditional Positive Regard
The practitioner has acceptance
and support for the student,
regardless of what they do or say.
Communicating Empathy The practitioner communicates the
empathy and unconditional positive
regard they have for the student.
Receiving Empathy
The student perceives the
unconditional positive regard and
empathy being communicated by
the practitioner.
In the chapter on therapeutic relationships in The Heart and Soul of Change: What Works in
Therapy, Alexandra Bachelor and Adam Horvath stated (p.163): 
At its core, the therapeutic relationship remains an intensely
human, personal, and essentially unique encounter.
Additional Tips for Effective Therapeutic Interventions 

In the classrooms, educators set clear expectations, provide guidance, and operate with healthy
boundaries. This classroom culture improves student capacity to learn, engage, and feel safe.
We have great news for you
These same strategies can and should be applied to the therapeutic relationship  For many
students, this may be their ﬁrst time engaging in a therapeutic relationship so providing them
with structure and guidance will increase their investment in their role. Let's look at some of the
best expectations you can set with your students
Expectations for therapy
Another great idea is to have a conversation with your client/student about what else they would
like to have and the expectations they have of you. What a great way to build a safe and
supportive relationship
With these tips in mind, Let's move on to look at a unique yet pivotal method of delivering
mental health interventions telemental health services  
Telemental Health Strategies 

Growing Your Plants Even From Afar
Telemental Health (TMH) is a term you may be familiar with, or it may represent a new concept.
TMH is mental health support from a distance  It is basically providing mental health services
through online platforms, such as video calls and phone calls. Social workers, counselors,
clinicians, and psychologists can all provide TMH. Having a counseling session with a student
over the phone or a live video group online, such as a family session, are some examples of
TMH.
In the previous lessons, you learned that some students may have limited access to mental
health services. Indeed, having limited access to mental health care may lead to youth going
untreated for their mental health needs. We know that compared to their counterparts, youth
with untreated mental health needs have lower academic performance. The National Alliance on
Mental Illness (NAMI) suggests that approximately 50% of students with emotional and
behavioral difficulties are more likely to drop out of school. TMH can be a valuable tool in
increasing access to care for these students.
Before you get started, reflect on your experience with 
TMH in school settings. Using the scale below, rate how
comfortable you feel about using TMH in your school (0
being lowest, 10 being highest).
If you re learning towards the 0-6 range, great  This lesson will provide you with a lot of helpful
information  If your school is new to TMH, it may be overwhelming at ﬁrst. You, other
professionals in your school, or parents may not know or understand this service and may have
many questions. By the end of this lesson, we at the SBHA hope that your comfort level
increases  We are here to provide any support. If you have any questions, please chat with us on
our community of practice platform.
If you re in the 7-10 range wonderful  You are already feeling comfortable with TMH  In this
lesson, you may already know some information, while some information may be novel to you
(please check this out)  You could also be a great resource for your peers by answering their
questions in our community of practice platform.
What Does Telemental Health Look Like? 

