
As you may already know and can see from the picture above, a mental health practitioner is in
one location and the student is in a different location. For practitioners like you, these locations
could be your homes, schools, or offices/clinics. While students also have the option to choose
their location (whether their homes or schools), studies show that the ideal location for
students to receive TMH services is in their schools. This is because some students may not
have connectivity or devices in their homes. Not only that but also, in general, youth are 6 times
more likely to complete mental health treatments in their schools compared to community
settings  
Sometimes, receiving a service at home creates conﬁdentiality issues when their families are
around. Some students may not have a private place to receive a service and express their needs.
Given these concerns, schools  abilities to provide technology and privacy make it especially
important to have school-based TMH.
When TMH services are offered in school settings, students have greater access to mental
health care providers. Having increased access to mental health providers translates into
students  increased chances of getting help for their mental health needs. As you may
remember from the prior lessons, mental health needs are one of the largest unmet health care
needs in the US. 
School-based TMH increases access to care, thereby addressing students  mental health needs
As a result, students can focus on learning
TMH helps you bring every student to the same table.
To review more bene ts of TMH in school settings, click
through the  ashcards below
Access to care 

Students have more access to care
As we mentioned in "All Hands on
Deck,  mental health statistics,
especially from when COVID had
just started, show many students
bene tted from TMH.
Convenience 

To receive a service, students do
not have to travel to the provider. It
also helps families who may have
limited transportation to travel to
the provider.
Students Like It 

Some students avoid seeking help
because of the stigma. TMH
provides the same private and
con dential services as in-person
therapy. Plus, youth are very
technology savvy.
Psychological Safety 

Studies show that when students
are in their familiar environments,
they have a greater feeling of
psychological safety. Leaving the
safety of school to go to a different
place can make some students feel
uncomfortable.
Satisfaction 

Research shows that students feel
highly satis ed with TMH services
(Hilty et al., 2013).
Rapport 

It may seem challenging to build
connections with students from
a distance. In the previous card,
however, we saw that students
were highly satis ed with their
TMH services. Rapport building
online is possible in many of the
same ways as face-to-facet
interactions: asking open-
Although you've just reviewed the beneﬁts of TMH, it is important to remember that TMH still
may not be the best ﬁt for some students. For example, you ll need to consider students
physical needs and developmental stage. Some students just aren t old enough to sit still in
front a screen for a long period of time with concentration  Other students may be experiencing
psychological concerns, such as suicidal ideation or self-injury, that are best addressed in
person. It is important to assess the level of risk and overall ﬁt before deciding to use TMH with
students
You just learned that students feel satisﬁed with TMH, and some prefer it when compared to in-
person services. As a mental health provider, what are your thoughts on TMH? If you re still
unsure or nervous, don't worry. In the next section, you will review certain TMH strategies in
more detail  These strategies will help you to feel more conﬁdent in providing TMH services if
you decide to do so
Different Telemental Health Strategies 

Cultivating Your Garden in different Ways
To review different TMH strategies, click through the
tabs below  
Selecting a Platform 

When deciding on which platform to use, it is helpful to use one that is cost-effective, easy to use,
and provides technical assistance as needed. You may have already experienced access problems
that are more due to complex platforms that do not provide any assistance other than internet
access. As a quick reminder- when choosing the right platform, please make sure it is compliant
with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).   
Preparing for Your Session 

As with all treatment sessions, have your plan for the session thought out. If there are any
materials or tools that you plan to share, have them handy. For a TMH session, you may want to
send information or a homework sheet via email prior to the session. When you are prepared for
a session, students perceive your conﬁdence which in turn makes them feel safe and comfortable.
Choosing a Location 

Choose a location that is private and free from distractions. If you deliver the service from your
home, and there may be sounds in the background (e.g., dog barking), let your students know.
This way, they know what is going on ahead of time and can feel more comfortable. TMH is
provided best in an environment that ensures privacy.
Using Online Tools and Resources 

One way to keep your students engaged during therapy is to use online resources. A variety of
online games and activities are available for TMH. We gathered some great online resources for
you. Please check links below the tabs to guide you in creating some engaging activities for your
students.
Establishing Online Rapport 

Online sessions may feel intimidating. If it is your ﬁrst time meeting a student, it may be helpful
to provide your student with a quick tour of your space. This way, the student may feel more
comfortable.
Building Online Relationships 

Since you are delivering your service online, remember to use nonverbal gestures, such as virtual
thumbs-ups or high-ﬁves to strengthen communication and build relationships.
Click on the links below for online resources and tools
you can use in TMH
Mad Libs
You can use this game to break the ice with younger students in TMH
We Do Listen
This resource hosts videos and lessons on topics ranging from dealing with bullying, learning to listen, and
telling the truth.
TMH Resources from MUSC
Find resources such as assessment ratings scales, PDFs for trauma narration via TMH, and more here.
you've looked at tips on getting started with TMH and tips on how to be comfortable in those
sessions. Here s another general component that is key: eye contact
Click through the arrows below and look at the images
of different providers  
You can see the mental health
provider looking at a different
place. Even though the provider
may be looking at the computer
This is an example of a serious
screen, it seems like they are
facial expression. It looks
working on something else on their
intimidating, doesn t it? When
screen.
students see you with serious
or intimidating facial
expressions, they may not feel
comfortable and may avoid
forming a relationship with you
and expressing how they feel.
Although using a camera may
We see the mental health provider
smiling, showing attention to the
student, and at the perfect
level/distance for eye contact.
With these overarching pieces of advice in mind, Let's look at guidance for each step of a TMH
session: starting, during, and concluding.
Click through the tabs below
STARTING T H E SESSION 

Starting with an online icebreaker may help you begin to build trust and therapeutic alliance.
Orient your student to TMH by explaining how the session will work.
Make your student feel comfortable by touring your space. Ask the student to do the same.
This way they may feel that you two are in the same room.
We recommend you determine signals between your student and you.  For example, agree
on a signal to stop, just in case someone they do not feel comfortable with happens to walk
into their room. They can use this signal to indicate they need to stop or take a break.
DURING THE SESSION 

Remember the signals you identiﬁed before the session and pay attention to those during the
session.
If your student is distracted during the session, rather than continuing, you may want to stop
and ask,  What s going on?" or "Is everything okay?
You may experience technical difficulties during your session. If so, let your student know
that you may stop for a couple of minutes to address the issue.
CONCLUDING THE SESSION 

Ask the student how they felt about the session: was there anything that the student liked or
didn t like and would they like anything to improve for the next session?
Before ending your session, make sure to plan the next one
Always end your session with a positive activity or statement praise what your student did
well. This is a good place to apply strengths-based language  This will allow them to ﬁnish
the lesson positively and look forward to the next session with an optimistic mindset.
Telemental Health Considerations 

Thus far, we have discussed the positives of TMH. It is also important to acknowledge some of
the concerns. We will now introduce you to some of the concerns with TMH. 
Click on the cards below to learn about some concerns
surrounding school-based TMH. As you explore these
concerns, consider potential solutions.
Confidentiality/Privacy 
 Students may not know if there
is someone else listening to
them. This raises concerns
about con dentiality and
privacy, which may lead them to
be hesitant to talk and share. At
the beginning of the session, it
is always important to remind
the students that their session
is not being recorded and that
Access to Internet 

If your school has limited or
unstable internet connections, it
may not be possible to provide
TMH services.
Technology Issues 
 Although having technology is a
great convenience, at times, it
may be dif cult to work with.
Having technological
dif culties may impact the
quality of service and the way
service is provided and
received. Therefore, we
recommend you use platforms
that have tech support and are
Competence with Technology 

Some providers may not be
familiar with using technology
in their sessions. Technology
issues can make us feel like we
do not know what we are doing.
Being uncomfortable with
technology might impact the
effectiveness of the session or
intervention. In those cases,
reach out to your tech support
These considerations are not  full stops  to implementing TMH in your school or practice. As
with every aspect of therapeutic interventions, challenges will occur. What matters is the
appropriateness, effectiveness, and relational component of the intervention, and the same is
true for TMH
Guidelines for Telemental Health 

When providing TMH, it is important to review guidelines and to stay up to date on the newly
emerging and best TMH practices. Some of these guidelines are provided by the State. There are
also other resources you can use  In the boxes below, we included several resources where you
can ﬁnd these guidelines
Telemental Health Resources
Resource 1
American Telemedicine Association (ATA)
ATA is committed to advance telehealth by increasing access to safe, a ordable, and
appropriate care in different networks including school settings.
https://www.americantelemed.org/
Resource 2
American Psychological Association (APA)
You may already be familiar with APA. It is the largest organization for psychologists.
APA s purpose is to advance knowledge of psychology to improve individuals
wellbeing.
apa.org
Resource 3
American Psychiatric Association
Largest psychiatric organization in the world  Its goal is to increase access to quality
of care by guiding clinicians with diagnostic manuals for mental health disorders. 
psychiatry.org
Resource 4
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP)
AACAP aims to support youth and adolescents for their mentally healthy
development. 
aacap.org
Resource 5
MUSC Center for Telehealth & SC Telehealth Alliance
MUSC Center for Telehealth and SC Telehealth Alliance (SCTA) are organizations in
South Carolina (SC) that provide access to care for students in their schools in SC.
Overall, the goals of these organizations are to improve the access to health care for
youth and adolescents in SC school settings. In 2019, SCTA won the American
Telemedicine Association's President's Award for its commitment to statewide
collaboration. Knowing that SC was recognized as a leader in telehealth gives us lots
of hope for reaching our goals of providing equal care and increasing access for every
student.
https://telehealthfortrauma.com/
We hope that you learned helpful information about school-based TMH. With access to care
being one of the common barriers to treatment, TMH is a viable option. Understanding the
beneﬁts of TMH and learning strategies to overcome barriers will strengthen treatment
opportunities for our students.
Before you move on to the summary, reﬂect one more time on your comfort with TMH in your
school. Use the same scale as before
If you are still in the 0-6 range, it's totally okay, don't be overwhelmed  If learning didn't occur
as expected, it may be a good idea to revisit this lesson and deeper dive to the resources
provided. Always remember that we are here to provide any support. If you have any questions,
please chat with us on our community of practice platform. 
If you are in the 7-10 range, great news  We are glad that you are now feeling comfortable with
using school TMH  With your school TMH knowledge and comfort, you could also be a great
resource for your peers by answering their questions in our community of practice platform. 
Let's review the lesson.
School-based mental health interventions support academic, social, interpersonal,
and behavioral outcomes for students, their families, and school faculty and sta
Understanding the ABCs of behavior, whether observationally or more technically
through an FBA, allows you to better match intervention to student need.
Manual-based approaches to mental health interventions are known for their
consistency and conﬁdence building while modular mental health interventions
more easily adapt to the individualities of each student and situation. 
Relationships with caring adults like yourself can promote resiliency in students,
which is the ability to balance the difficulties and the successes of life.
There are as many evidence-based mental health interventions as there are plants
in a garden, from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) to Solution Focused Brief
Therapy (SFBT) to ACT (Acceptance and Commitment Therapy) what matters is
that the intervention is developmentally appropriate, evidence-based, and matches
student and practitioner preferences and experiences. 
Implementing telemental health (TMH) sessions in a school setting meets the
needs and preferences of many students and practitioners, as well as provides a
ﬂexible option for life circumstances. 
Progress Monitoring for Practitioners in Schools



@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Progress Monitoring for Practitioners in Schools
Outcomes: 

1. Understand the importance of progress monitoring for mental health interventions at
Tier 3 
2. Illustrate how practitioners can use progress monitoring to encourage better student
outcomes
3. Discuss data-informed decision making and its role in the progress monitoring of
mental health interventions
4. Identify various types of measurements commonly used in progress monitoring and
understand how to access and utilize them
Progress Monitoring in Schools
Comprehensive Progress Monitoring in the Multi-Tiered System of
Supports (MTSS) 

Progress monitoring is a process to track and assess a student's academic and behavioral
progress over time. It involves the regular collection and analysis of data to determine whether a
student is making expected progress or if they require additional support or adjustments to
their plan. It is simply a way to ensure that student progress is being measured and monitored.
When done well, progress monitoring not only shows how the student is progressing on
identiﬁed intervention goals but also offers opportunities to make needed changes to assist in
furthering progress.
Progress monitoring is a key component of the Multi-Tiered System of Supports (MTSS), and it
ﬁts within each tier of MTSS. Across each level of MTSS, progress monitoring:
Assesses student performance
Highlights student strengths along with identiﬁed needs
Provides feedback for any needed improvement in interventions
Focuses on the ﬁdelity of implementation with considerations for cultural and
linguistic diversity
Progress Monitoring at Tier 3 

This lesson will focus on progress monitoring of behavioral health goals with students who
have identiﬁed signiﬁcant social, emotional, behavioral, or mental health needs requiring
intensive Tier 3 services. 
As a component of Tier 3 services, school mental health practitioners create treatment plans.
Treatment plans include attention to needs, strengths, and outcomes and involve setting goals
for students. As mentioned in Inclusive Treatment Planning, an effective way to ensure that the
goals are both meaningful and measurable is by using SMARTIE goals.
This lesson will focus on progress monitoring of behavioral health goals with students who
have identiﬁed signiﬁcant social, emotional, behavioral, or mental health needs requiring
intensive Tier 3 services. 
As a component of Tier 3 services, school mental health practitioners create treatment plans.
Treatment plans include attention to needs, strengths, and outcomes and involve setting goals
for students. As mentioned in Inclusive Treatment Planning, an effective way to ensure that the
goals are both meaningful and measurable is by using SMARTIE goals.
Let's refresh your memory on SMARTIE goals and
understand why each component is relevant to progress
monitoring. To review, click on each component.
Specific 

When setting a goal, it is important to be precise about what you want to achieve with the student. Specific
goals provide clarity to both you and the student, making it easier to understand what success looks like.
For example, instead of setting a vague goal like "improve behavior," a specific goal could be "reduce
instances of disruptive behavior during classroom instruction."
Measurable 

Goals should be quantifiable, allowing you to track progress over time. Measurable goals help to answer
questions like "How much progress has been made?" or "How close is the student to reaching the desired
outcome?" This aspect is particularly critical when it comes to progress monitoring because it enables us
to collect data and evidence to assess how well interventions are working.
Attainable 

Goals should be realistic and attainable based on the student's current abilities and circumstances. Always
be mindful to set goals that challenge the student but are not so far out of reach that they become
demotivating. Achievable goals foster a sense of accomplishment, which is essential for maintaining
motivation during Tier 3 interventions.
Relevant 

Goals should directly align with the student's needs, strengths, and desired outcomes. The relevance of a
goal ensures that the efforts put into achieving it will have a meaningful impact on the student. 
Time-bound 

Goals should have a specific timeframe within which they are to be achieved. This timeframe creates a
sense of urgency and helps you to establish milestones for tracking progress and evaluate the effectiveness
of interventions within a reasonable period.
Inclusive 

Inclusive goals consider the perspectives and input of all relevant stakeholders, including the student,
parents, teachers, and other professionals involved in the student's care. Involving everyone in the goal-
setting process promotes collaboration and a shared commitment to the student's success.
Equitable 

Equitable goals recognize the unique needs, backgrounds, and circumstances of each student. They ensure
that the interventions and support provided are fair and just, addressing any disparities or inequalities that
may exist among students with Tier 3 needs. An equitable approach promotes equal access to
opportunities and resources, fostering a more inclusive and supportive learning environment. 
What Does Progress Monitoring of Mental Health
Interventions Involve?
Progress monitoring and your treatment plan goals go hand-in-hand. They help both the
practitioner and the student, including their family, see where progress is occurring and where
adjustments are needed.
As discussed in the last lesson, not every student will have the same response to a particular
intervention, even for the same identiﬁed need. Monitoring a student s symptoms over time is
one of the best ways to know whether a particular therapeutic practice is working or not.
The main components of progress monitoring include: 
Selecting targets that are meaningful to the student
Monitoring more than just symptoms
Providing feedback to the student and student s family
Evolving, changing, or ending intervention based on progress monitoring results
and success or setbacks
Let's look brie y at each of these components. 
Identifying Targets 

The ﬁrst main component to progress monitoring mental health interventions is selecting
targets that are meaningful to the student. Flip the cards below to get an idea of what this
means and how to incorporate it into progress monitoring with your students.
Selecting Targets: 

Collaboratively selecting
targets that are meaningful to
the student and their family is
important in ensuring
successful behavior change
outcomes.
Using Measurements: 

Using measurements to identify
problem areas and then
intermittently reapplying the
measurement to monitor
progress, in companion with
observational data, helps the
provider to evolve, change, or
continue the intervention to
accurately work toward
meeting identi ed goals and
Variety: 

There are various ways a
practitioner may facilitate
target/goal identification. An
example would be to use a
measurement tool to support a
conversation around de ning
targets and then identify key
points throughout the school
year to track and measure the
student s progress using the
Let's practice what you just learned about selecting targets
that are meaningful to the student. Take a moment to orient
yourself to your new student, George. You will connect with
George throughout the next series of activities. Feel free to
grab a pen and paper to take a few case notes
Meet George
An 8th grader, George, has been identiﬁed as needing Tier 3 mental health interventions
based on anger outbursts in the classroom that seem directed at himself, withdrawing and
isolating from peers with whom he was once close, and other behaviors indicating there may
be some serious mood disturbances. These problems appear to be affecting his academic
performance, social skills, and overall well-being at school and at home. You begin meeting
twice a week with George for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). George is unable to
identify why he has developed these feelings and behaviors and is hesitant to share much
during therapy, similar to how he has been behaving in the classroom. 
Reffect on what you just read about George and then
answer the following question before moving to the next
component of progress monitoring. Remember that
there is no one right answer, think deeply and sit with it
for a bit. 
Why is it important to focus on goals that are meaningful for George? 
Here is one way to answer this question.
It is clear to you that George is struggling a great deal. The information you reviewed from
George's "request for assistance" indicates that George is dealing with some symptoms of
depression. You recognize that George is using emotions like anger to cope with underlying
frustrations and/or triggering events. You also note that this is a change from his previous
functioning. You understand the importance of voice and buy-in. 
You know that working on SMARTIE goals collaboratively with George will empower his voice
and further your therapeutic alliance, building key trust and rapport.
Comprehensive Progress Monitoring 

Let's take some time to review the second component of progress monitoring of interventions
monitoring more than just symptoms. Flip the cards below to understand what this means
and how to incorporate it into progress monitoring with your students.
Monitor more than just symptoms: 

It is important to not only
observe, assess, and measure
social, emotional, and
behavioral functioning, but to
also incorporate education
outcomes, attendance,
relationships with peers and
teachers, and more into
progress monitoring. All these
measures will help to accurately
Student Outcomes: 

Student outcomes (e.g.,
attendance, academic
performance) can teach mental
health providers a lot about
how a student is doing outside
of counseling sessions with
them. Without this additional
data, the practitioner is not
seeing the entire picture and
may miss vital steps in the
The Full Picture: 

You can incorporate monitoring
beyond symptoms by
requesting reports or short
assessments from the student s
teachers. It is hard to assess
any health problem without
looking at the full picture. You
already know that practitioners
and teachers are both bogged
down with so much to do, so we
To think about what this looks like in practice, let's reconnect with George.
Many of George s symptoms present as externalizing behaviors. You observe him in therapy
and in the classroom each week and record your ﬁndings. Although George is sharing more
openly in session, thanks to your Temperature Reading activity, you note that there are
additional indicators you would like to track to monitor George's progress.
After reffecting on the paragraph you just read, think
about the following question (Remember, there is not
one correct answer, so get creative ).
How else can you ensure a comprehensive view of George's overall progress? 
Here is one way to answer the question.
You want to ensure that you are attending to both George's more obvious externalizing behaviors
but also his internalizing behaviors and their impact on other areas of George's life. You decide
that you need additional insight from George's teachers related to his behavior, attitude toward
peers, and academic performance. You use an initial, short Strengths and difficulty Questionnaire
(SDQ) paired with brief email check-ins for more qualitative feedback related to George's
frustration tolerance and use of peer support. You also begin bi-weekly calls with George's mom
to discuss behaviors occurring in the home and provide coaching on replacement
behaviors/strategies. You have George's mom complete some Likert-scaled questions to
monitor her perceptions of effectiveness as a support for George's treatment progress. 
Feedback and Quality Improvement 

The third main component to progress monitoring mental health interventions with students
in the school setting is to provide feedback to the student and the student s family. Flip the
cards below to review the reasons this is important
Progress Data Utilization: 

Providing feedback to the student
and their family can increase the
likelihood that progress data is
utilized    
Whole Team Approach: 

It is important for everyone on the
team to know where the student is
in progress and growth and that
includes the student themselves
Ideas to take into School: 

You can create self-reporting
visuals to show students such
as the temperature scale we will
discuss later on in this lesson.
You can also have the student
help input self-reporting data
into notes for progress
monitoring so they have an
understanding of where they
stand in the intervention and
Take a moment to check in with George while considering the role of feedback in
progress monitoring.
You are still meeting with George twice weekly for CBT, observing his behaviors, collecting
classroom assessments from his teacher, and engaging with his mom. You have noticed
from your data that George's externalizing behaviors, speciﬁcally his angry outbursts, have
signiﬁcantly reduced and that his grades are making a turn for the better. George has also
become more comfortable with therapy. He has really taken to the temperature reading and
begins to share his emotional states in more detail. He says he is confused about why he still
feels so "stuck" and shares that he often feels hopeless because nothing seems to be
changing.
After reffecting on George's progress, think about the
following question.
How might you provide feedback to George? 
You are grateful that George feels safe enough in your relationship to express his hopelessness.
You respond empathically to his feelings of hopelessness, inquiring further. You recognize that
George feels like he "is not doing any better" and that his "teachers dislike him." You take a
moment to reframe these thoughts and offer evidence to the contrary. You share with George the
positive qualitative feedback from his teachers/mom, show him the incremental rise in his
grades, and help him review progress in his mood journal. You are authentic with George, sharing
opportunities for continued growth, such as in his peer relationships. George responds positively.
George even wants to discuss new measurable goals for his peer relationships.
You are mindful of George's struggle with hopelessness and bring this issue back to your MTSS
team. Together, you all brainstorm strategies to provide more consistent feedback to George
throughout the school day and at home. 
As George continues to be successful at adapting behavior and thoughts independently, the team
begins to discuss a plan for adjusting the intensity of support while continuing to monitor overall
functioning.
Evolve or Conclude 

Lastly, the fourth main component of progress monitoring at a Tier 3 level is to evolve, change,
or end intervention based on progress monitoring results and successes or setbacks. Flip the
cards below to examine how this looks.
Assess the Need: 

Just because a student bene ts
from Tier 3 mental health
interventions at one point does not
mean that they will necessarily
always need that intervention.
Enhance or End: 

It is sometimes appropriate to
enhance or change the intervention
based on evolving needs of the
student. It is also sometimes
appropriate to end intervention if
your progress monitoring has
consistently shown that the student
exhibits successful behavior
change.
Student Success: 

Student success can be monitored
by reviewing the progress of the
student yourself, with the student,
and with the team in order to
choose the best direction to take for
student success.
Let's reflect on George and decide whether you should evolve, change, or end his
intervention.
As you closely track George's progress over the course of his treatment and collaboration
with teachers and his mother, you notice positive shifts in his behavior, academic
performance, and emotional expression. George has made signiﬁcant strides in reducing his
anger outbursts, improving his grades, and becoming more comfortable sharing his
emotions in treatment.
George has shown significant progress  Lastly,
considering George's progress, think about the following
question.
Given George's progress, what are the next steps for his intervention plan? 
You recognize the importance of evolving the intervention to meet his changing needs. In your
team meetings with the MTSS team, you discuss the possibility of adjusting the intensity of
support. It's clear that George has developed new coping skills and is becoming more self-aware.
He's expressed a desire to work on speciﬁc goals related to his peer relationships.
You and the MTSS team decide to transition from twice-weekly therapy sessions to once-a-
week sessions, allowing George more time to practice his newfound skills independently. You
also decide to involve George more directly in setting his therapy goals, giving him a sense of
ownership over his progress.
The Role of Data-informed Decision Making in
Progress Monitoring 

A Comprehensive Guide to Utilizing Assessments for Individualized
Student Progress
As you know, data-informed decision making and progress monitoring are inextricably linked
in providing effective individualized support for students. Data-informed decision making is the
process of continuously using data to inform services. It is extremely important in the ﬁeld of
school behavioral health to use data as a base for your decisions when it comes to providing
services to students.   
Reﬂect back on what you just learned about the components of progress monitoring. These
components collectively generate crucial data points that serve as the backbone of data-
informed decision making. This means that data-informed decision making is the compass
that guides progress monitoring and conﬁrms that each step is purposeful and responsive to
the unique needs of the student.
Let's review what data can be used for. Data can help you:
Identify needs (i.e., needs assessment)
Tailor interventions to those identiﬁed needs (i.e., goal setting)
Make changes if needs are not being met (i.e., progress monitoring)
The most important aspects of data used to make decisions in progress monitoring are that the
data is consistent, reported frequently, timely, accessible, and built into daily routines. 
Click through the  ashcards below for examples of what
each one looks like as a school practitioner.
For data to be consistent it needs to
come from various knowledgeable
sources about the subject (such as a
self-report, family member, or
educator) and needs to be relevant
to what you are monitoring.
Reporting data frequently is done
by giving the same assessments at
intervals of time to see if change or
progress is being made.
Data should be collected and
recorded in a timely manner that is
relevant to the student and
intervention.
All members of the the team
should be able to see and use
the data
Data can be collected as a part
of daily, weekly, bi-monthly, or
monthly routines. This can look
like a student  lling out a short
self-report of feelings each
morning, a teacher reporting
data once a week on a student,
or a practitioner observing the
student every Tuesday and
Thursday.
Reporting Data
It can be overwhelming to know exactly how to report data, and this may vary by school.
Understanding the mechanism of data reporting is essential for creating effective support
systems. You are now going to explore how data reporting as a practitioner on an MTSS team
typically goes by looking into the who, what, when, and where of data reporting at Tier 3.
WH O ?
WH AT ?
WH E N ?
WH E R E ?
Who reports Tier 3 data and whom is it reported to? 
Well, simply put, you as the practitioner are responsible for reporting it  While students, families,
and educators report data to you, you are responsible for analyzing that data and reporting all Tier
3 data. You may also be wondering who the data is reported to. Data is reported to the students,
family, and MTSS team.
WH O ?
WH AT ?
WH E N ?
WH E R E ?
What happens after data is reported? 
 
Once data is reported, it is continually used in the treatment of the student to address needs and
identify progress. his means that the reported data serves as a foundation for making decisions
regarding the student's ongoing interventions.
Data is also collected to help focus the needs of Tier 3 programs in schools and at the district level.
This means that data reporting is not just for individual student support but also contributes to
broader program planning and improvement e orts.
WH O ?
WH AT ?
WH E N ?
WH E R E ?
When does data reporting take place? 

Data reporting does not have a speciﬁc timeline across the board. It can range depending on the
speciﬁc context and needs of the students. It can occur on a weekly basis with the MTSS team and
students, on a monthly basis with families, and even on a yearly or bi-yearly basis at the district
level. This ﬂexibility in reporting timelines ensures that data is collected and reported in a way
that aligns with the unique needs of each student and the requirements of the school or district.
WH O ?
WH AT ?
WH E N ?
WH E R E ?
Where does data reporting take place? 

Data reporting takes place in MTSS meetings, meetings with students, and meetings with
families. These settings provide opportunities for practitioners and stakeholders to discuss and
act upon the reported data effectively.
Now that you have gained a comprehensive understanding of the roles played by data reporting,
Let's pivot to another critical aspect of the progress monitoring process: measurements. Just as
data reporting provides valuable insights, measurements of a structured way to quantify and
assess various aspects of students' progress. Let's get started
Time to Talk Measurements 

it's no secret that measurements are a huge part of progress monitoring as they give great data
and insight into how the student progresses with the intervention you provide. Measurements
are not just given to students. They are also ﬁlled out by caretakers, teachers, other school staff,
and of course, the practitioner who provides the service. 
Before talking about measurements, Let's remember two critical concepts of measurement for
progress monitoring:
Reliability: Reliability is about the consistency and stability of measurement over
time. In progress monitoring, it ensures that if you measure a student's
performance multiple times, you will get similar results if the student's actual
performance has not changed. Reliability helps identify real changes versus random
ﬂuctuations. 
Validity: is the extent to which a measurement tool or assessment actually
measures what it is intended to measure. In progress monitoring, validity ensures
that the data collected are meaningful and relevant to the educational goals and
objectives set for the student.
Digging in a garden's dirt
In this section, you will review many different measurements used in progress monitoring. You
will learn what they are best used for and why. As these assessments have versions for self,
teacher/educators, and family/caregivers, you may see them more than once.
Before delving into each version of assessments, Let's consider unique advantages and
limitations of each version of assessments: self, teacher/educators, and family/caregivers.
Review the table that describes the advantages and
limitations of assessments. Click to enlarge.
Table describing the advantages and limitations of assessments
Self-Assessments 

Let's start with self-assessments. Click on the assessments below to learn how to use self-
assessments for progress monitoring.
The Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale for Children (CES-DC) 

What is it?
The Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale for Children (CES-DC) is a
student self-report measure to assess depressive symptoms in children, adolescents,
and young adults ages 6-23. 
How is it administered?
20-item assessment given to students to assess depression/mood that takes between
5-10 minutes to complete.
Where is it? 
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Depression Self-Rating Scale for Children (DSRS-C) 

What is it?
The Depression Self Rating Scale for Children (DSRSC) is a measure designed to assess
depression symptoms in children ages 8 to 14 within the past week.
How is it administered?
18-item assessment that can be given to students to assess progress of depression and
mood symptoms that takes 5-10 minutes to complete.
Where is it? 
Learn more about the assessment here.
Child PTSD Symptom Scale (CPSS-SR-5) 

What is it?
Foa s Child PTSD Symptom Scale for DSM-5 (CPSS-5) was developed to screen and
assess the severity of DSM-5 post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in children and
adolescents exposed to trauma. There is a self-report (CPSS-SR-5) version, which
includes an optional trauma screen to identify frightening or stressful events.
How is it administered?
29-item assessment to progress monitor symptoms of trauma and takes about 15
minutes for students to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Identification with School Questionnaire (ISQ) 

What is it?
The Identiﬁcation with School Questionnaire (ISQ) assesses a student s emotional
engagement with school using two subscales. The  Valuing  subscale assesses how
important or useful a student regards learning, to what degree a student agrees that
school is an important institution in society, and how much school is part of the
student s self-deﬁnition. The  Belongingness  subscale assesses the degree to which a
student feels that he or she is a signiﬁcant member of the school community.
How is it administered?
16 item assessment that can be given to students in grades 8-12 to measure value and
belongingness in the school.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Pediatric Symptom Checklist (Y-PSC) 

What is it?
The Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC) is a screening tool intended to identify a wide
range of psychosocial concerns. Full version was developed for youth (Y-PSC).
How is it administered?
35-item (or abbreviated 17-item) assessment that can be given to students to monitor
progress of symptoms such as anxiety, depression, disruptive behavior, global
functioning, hyperactivity, and inattention and takes about 5 minutes to complete
(even less for abbreviated version).
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The School Burnout Inventory (SBI) 

What is it?
The School Burnout Inventory (SBI) assesses three factors associated with school-
related stress among upper middle school and high school students, including
Exhaustion at school, Cynicism toward the meaning of school, and Sense of inadequacy
at school. Exhaustion is related to feelings of strain and chronic fatigue resulting from
overtaxing schoolwork; cynicism is related to having a detached attitude toward
school and school-work; sense of inadequacy is related to diminished feelings of
competence, success, achievement, and efficacy associated with school and
schoolwork.
How is it administered?
3- or 9-item assessment that can be given to students in grades 8-12 to monitor
progress of exhaustion and school burnout that takes 1-5 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED-C) 

What is it?
The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED) assesses symptoms related
to overall anxiety and speciﬁc DSM anxiety disorder criteria. Versions are available for
students ages 8-18 (SCARED-C)
How is it administered?
41-item assessment that can be given to students to monitor progress around anxiety
symptoms and takes 10 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Strengths and Dif culties Questionnaire (SDQ) 
What is it?
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) 

psychological attributes across emotional, behavioral, and social dimensions.
How is it administered?
25-item assessment given to students to monitor the progress of symptoms such as
anxiety, depression, disruptive behavior, global functioning, hyperactivity, and
inattention that takes 5-10 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Student Engagement Instrument (SEI) 

What is it?
The Student Engagement Instrument (SEI) assesses a student's level of engagement at
school and with learning. Speciﬁcally, the SEI measures "higher-inference  types of
student engagement, including cognitive and affective (psychological) engagement.
How is it administered?
33-item (for grades 3-5) or 35-item (for grades 6-12) assessment that monitors
progress of student cognitive and psychological engagement in schools and takes 20-
30 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Students' Life Satisfaction Scale (SLSS) 

What is it?
The Students' Life Satisfaction Scale (SLSS) evaluates self-reported life satisfaction
for students ages 8- 18.
How is it administered?
7-item assessment that can be given to students ages 8-18 to assess for life satisfaction
and social skills and takes less than 5 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
Teacher/Educator and Family/Guardian Assessments 

Click on the assessments below to learn more about each teacher/educator and family/guardian
assessment listed, how to use it for progress monitoring, and to download a copy.
The Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC) 

What is it?
The Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC, revised) allows educators to rate
behaviors and symptoms evidenced by youth diagnosed with Autism Spectrum
Disorders (ASD). In contrast to other measures that diagnose ASD, the ATEC was
designed to measure effectiveness of treatment over time and allows for individual
progress monitoring.
How is it administered?
77-item assessments for teachers to complete for students age 2 and up to report on
behavior progress monitoring around autism symptoms.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Child Mania Rating Scale (CMRS-T & CMRS-P) 

What is it?
The Child Mania Rating Scale, educator/teacher-rated (CMRS-T) assessment assesses
symptoms that reﬂect the characteristics of a manic episode according to DSM-IV
criteria, including symptoms consistent with criterion A (levels of elation/irritability),
B (levels of self-esteem/grandiosity), and C (impairment to functioning). Items for the
measures were developed speciﬁcally for youth and adolescents rather than through
adaptation of an existing adult-oriented rating scale.
How is it administered?
21-item assessment for teachers to complete for students aged 5-17 to progress
monitor depression and mood symptoms and takes 10-15 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) 
 
What is it?
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) assesses positive and negative
psychological attributes across emotional, behavioral, and social dimensions
How is it administered?
25-item assessment that assessment that takes 5-10 minutes for a teacher to
complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Student Risk Screening Scale (SRSS) 

What is it?
The Student Risk Screening Scale (SRSS-E7) helps identify externalizing behaviors
among school-aged students. It was originally developed to detect risk for anti-social
behavior patterns. 
How is it administered?
7-item assessments for teachers to complete for students grades 12-K and takes 15-20
minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic Rating Scale 

What is it?
The Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic Rating Scale assesses the presence of DSM-5 criteria
for ADHD Inattentive, Hyperactive/Impulsive, and combined subtypes. The initial
assessment includes screening for common behavioral and emotional comorbidities of
ADHD. A follow-up assessment is available for progress monitoring symptoms and
tracking medication side effects.
How is it administered?
43-item assessments for teachers of students ages 6-12 that takes 10 minutes to
complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC) 

What is it?
The Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC) is a screening tool intended to identify a wide
range of psychosocial concerns. Full (35-item) and abbreviated (17-item) versions
were developed for youth (Y-PSC) and caregiver (PSC) respondents. An additional
version for caregivers is available in pictorials (PPSC; picture options). Originally
utilized in primary care, the PSC s application has also been expanded to school and
community health and behavioral health settings.
How is it administered?
35-item assessment for caregivers of children ages 3-16 to complete and takes 5
minutes to complete.
Where is it?
You can access the assessment here.
The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED-P) 

What is it?
The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED) assesses symptoms related
to overall anxiety and speciﬁc DSM anxiety disorder criteria. Caregiver report
(SCARED-P) is available. The measure has been validated in outpatient mental health,
pediatric, community, and school-based samples and shows utility in delineating
anxiety disorders from non-anxiety disorders.
How is it administered?
41-item assessment for caregivers of children ages 8-18 to complete and takes around
10 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
You can access the assessment here.
Choosing the Right Measure 

We hear you  There are lots of measures introduced. You may have questions about how to
select the right one for your speciﬁc needs. Now Let's discuss some of the key practices for
choosing the right measure.
Click on the tabs to review.
ALIGNMENT WITH GOALS 

The ﬁrst consideration in choosing the right measure is to align it with the speciﬁc goals of
progress monitoring. Determine what you want to assess and track. For instance, if you are
focusing on depressive symptoms, assessments like CES-DC or DSRS-C may be suitable for self-
assessment. If you're looking for behavioral concerns, teacher assessments like SDQ could be
valuable.
DEVELOPMENTALLY AWARE 

Consider the age and developmental stage of the student. Younger children may have limited self-
