#####
*****
Core MTSS Practices-1.1
This course is designed to provide educators and school professionals with a
comprehensive understanding of core MTSS and integration of school mental
health practices while emphasizing the importance of developing cultural
competence, cultural humility, and fostering strong community and family
partnerships. These practices are a necessary part of creating an inclusive and
supportive learning environment that meets the diverse needs of all students.  
Get ready to embark on a transformative journey that will empower you to build a
more equitable and effective educational experience for your students and their
families. 
Building Supportive Pathways through an MTSS Framework
Using the Tiered Delivery System

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Building Supportive Pathways through an MTSS
Framework
Outcomes:
1. Review the MTSS framework and key terms used throughout the implementation
process
2. Unfold the stages of MTSS implementation and recognize the integrative approach to
establishing mental and behavioral health practices within academic MTSS models 
3. Summarize the elements of an effective, sustainable, comprehensive Multi-tiered
System of Supports 



What is an MTSS Framework? 
Reviewing MTSS
Multi-Tiered System of Supports (MTSS) is a comprehensive, evidence-based framework for
supporting successful student outcomes and eliminating barriers to learning. It is designed to
identify and address the needs of all students, including those who may be struggling
academically and behaviorally, by providing interventions and supports at varying levels of
intensity.
It's important to clarify that the MTSS framework itself is not an
intervention or speciﬁc curriculum. Instead, it serves as a comprehensive
framework that guides schools in selecting and implementing
appropriate curriculum and interventions based on the needs of their
students. The term "comprehensive" refers to a holistic and all-
encompassing approach to addressing the diverse needs of students. A
framework can be thought of as simply a structured guide or roadmap.
In this case, it is a guide to building the comprehensive system that
serves all students and staff.  
The beauty of the MTSS framework is that it is customizable. This means interventions selected
within the MTSS framework can vary widely based on the unique needs and resources of each
school. There is no one-size-ﬁts-all approach. The framework allows for ﬂexibility, enabling
schools to address the speciﬁc challenges their students, families, and school community face.
As long as schools are using a tiered approach with data-informed decision making, evidence-
based practices, and interventions, they are following MTSS. 

To get started, let's take a moment to review a few key
MTSS terms. Flip each card to read the deffnitions.
MTSS is organized into 3 tiers or
levels of intervention. When you
1 of 6
Tier:  MTSS is organized into 3 tiers or levels of intervention. When you hear tiers, you may think of a ranking system. In MTSS, this is not
the case. Every tier is important and deserves careful attention and planning
2 of 6
Intervention: Intervention is something adults put in place to support students. Some interventions are school-wide, and some are for a
group or individual students. They can address the environment, like changing a student's seat in the classroom. 
3 of 6
Intensity: Intensity refers to how strongly we apply the intervention. Increasing intensity can look like more intervention sessions, scheduling
sessions more often, or increasing the number of weeks of the intervention.
4 of 6
Layering: Layering means applying several interventions at the same time. For instance, all students receiving Tier
2 and Tier 3 support have layered interventions, because they are still exposed to school-wide Tier 1 supports
5 of 6
school community: The school community includes students, families, general and special education teachers, classroom assistants, administrators, paraprofessionals, office staff, custodial staff, cafeteria staff, bus drivers, academic and behavior interventionists, school mental health staff (counselor, psychologist, social worker), school nurses, athletic coaching staff, after-care staff, and community stakeholders.
6 of 6
Fidelity: Fidelity refers to how closely we are practicing the intervention as it was originally developed. When we stick to the intervention (or have high fidelity), we can be more confident that we are addressing the student's issue. If we have low fidelity, or make changes to the original intervention, it may not work as intended or be as effective as possible. 



The Tiered Approach
In the "All Hands on Deck" course, you learned about the tiered infrastructure of the MTSS. The
tiered approach is a central component of MTSS and involves organizing support and
instruction into multiple levels or tiers, each with different levels of intensity and speciﬁcity.
Flip the cards for a quick review.
1 of 3
Tier 1: Universal Supports, This tier focuses on providing high-quality instruction and interventions to all students. It
includes evidence-based teaching strategies, differentiated instruction, and ongoing progress monitoring to ensure that students are
making adequate academic and behavioral progress.
2 of 3
Tier 2: Targeted Supports, Students who require additional support beyond what is provided in Tier 1 receive targeted interventions and supports in Tier 2. These interventions are more individualized and intensive, targeting specific areas of need. Examples of Tier 2 interventions may include small-group instruction, mentoring programs, or social, emotional, and behavioral interventions. 
3 of 3
Tier 3: Intensive Supports, Students who require the most intensive level of support receive individualized interventions and supports in Tier 3. These interventions may involve one-on-one instruction, specialized assessments, and intensive interventions. Students in Tier 3 often receive support from specialists such as special education teachers, counselors, or interventionists. 

At every tier, educators, administrators, and support staff collaborate to select evidence-based
practices that develop skills for groups and individuals. This approach ensures systematic and
focused support for students with diverse academic and behavioral requirements. It
acknowledges the varying needs of students and provides appropriate interventions to improve
overall outcomes.

What does this mean for your school district?
Using the MTSS framework gives schools the power to connect education, health, and mental
health systems to support successful students, schools, and communities. The tiers within the
MTSS system arrange equitable, streamlined, and proﬁcient planning and delivery of services
within the schools. By using the framework in this way, schools can maximize effciency and
support the needs of all students.
Watch the video below as Dr. Lucille Eber, a project coordinator with the Midwest Positive
Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) Network and a collaborative partner with the U.S.
Department of Education’s National PBIS Center, sums up the MTSS framework and how it
works. 

How is MTSS different from other systems or initiatives?
MTSS is designed to serve all students through a combination of universal programming and,
as Dr. Eber described in the video above, a "seamless" connection to support based on
individual student needs. Supports are layered or intensiﬁed based on individual student
strengths, needs, and progress, as well as the overall school community.
MTSS differs from other systems in key ways:
comprehensive and integrated approach
emphasizes data-informed decision making for targeted interventions
fosters collaboration through a team-based approach involving professionals from various
disciplines
takes a proactive stance by aiming to prevent diffculties before they escalate,
distinguishing it from reactive frameworks focused on disciplinary actions or remediation
This multi-faceted approach distinguishes MTSS from other systems that may have a narrower
focus or lack integration across various domains.
Let's listen in some more as Dr. Eber describes how tiered supports should look and feel within
MTSS.  
Many of us have seen initiatives in education come and go. The MTSS framework is
different because it organizes the adults and available resources to meet the needs
of the school population. When district initiatives change, the MTSS framework
remains allowing for consistency and sustainability. 




Practical Steps for Implementing MTSS
Implementing MTSS practices, whether a district is at the beginning or integrating school
mental health into an existing academic multi-tiered system, requires careful planning,
collaboration, and a systematic approach. 

New to MTSS?
Some districts may be at the beginning stages of developing an MTSS infrastructure. In this
case, here is a "to do" list.
1. Establish a leadership team: Create a dedicated leadership team comprising
administrators, teachers, counselors, and other relevant stakeholders to drive the
implementation process. 
2. Develop a shared vision and goals: Clearly articulate the vision, goals, and expected
outcomes of the MTSS implementation. This shared vision will guide decision
making and provide a common understanding among all stakeholders. 
3. Assess readiness and capacity: Evaluate the readiness and capacity of the district,
including available resources, professional development needs, and infrastructure.
This assessment will help identify areas that require additional support or
investment. 
4. Prioritize the foundational components: Focus on establishing the core
components of MTSS, such as high-quality differentiated instruction, meaningful
assessment and progress monitoring, and evidence-based practices. Begin with a
universal framework.
5. Build a data system: Develop a comprehensive data system to collect, analyze, and
use data effectively. This includes implementing data collection tools, establishing
data protocols, and training staff to interpret and utilize the data for decision
making.
6. Provide professional development: Offer ongoing professional development to
educators to build their knowledge and skills in MTSS implementation. This may
involve training on data-informed decision making, instructional strategies,
behavior management, mental health literacy, and collaboration among staff.

That's a big list! But all of this is accomplished in stages of implementation, an effective process
of supporting the long-term commitment of MTSS (National Implementation Research
Network, 2018). Read through the suggested steps of the implementation process below. This
will guide the district in completing that long to do list in a structured feasible manner. 



Stages of Implementation
Scroll through to review the suggested steps of the implementation process. This will
guide the district in completing that long to do list in a structured feasible manner.

Step 1
Exploration
The exploration stage assesses the district's needs, the ﬁt of the proposed evidence-
based practices, and the practicality for implementation. If exploration leads to a
decision to proceed, installation planning commences. 
During this stage, teams may ask themselves:  
- What is MTSS?  
- What will it take to implement a comprehensive multi-tiered system of support
in our school or district?  
- How will we assess our readiness for change so we can eliminate barriers that
may prevent successful implementation?

Step 2
Planning
In the planning stage, leadership teams devise strategic plans to acquire necessary
resources for designing an effcient multi-tiered support system. This includes steps
like providing initial staff training and setting up performance assessment tools
before effective implementation can occur. Set up your infrastructure with
appropriate teams, data systems, and an implementation checklist. 
During this stage, teams may ask themselves: 
- What are our goals, and do we have a deﬁned action plan?
- What early professional learning needs to occur to build the foundation for
implementation?  
- How will we measure success?  
- How do we engage all stakeholders in understanding the relevancy of this work? 

Step 3
Initial Implementation
Next, schools and districts begin to implement a multi-tiered system of support. The
initial implementation phase sets the foundation for the ongoing MTSS process.
Several key activities and steps are typically undertaken to establish the framework
and begin providing targeted support to students including ongoing staff training,
developing intervention implementation teams, resource allocation, data collection
and analysis, tiered design based on data, curriculum adjustments, etc. The speciﬁc
steps and activities may vary based on the school's context, needs, and available
resources. After you have built capacity, try out the practices, learn, and improve. 
During this stage, teams may ask themselves:  
- What structures are in place (e.g., new schedules) to support early
implementation changes? 
- How do we support early innovators with robust scaffolds and supports such as
PD and coaching?  
- How are we using data to drive our work?   
- How much time is provided for early adopters to collaborate and reﬂect on their
new practices? (Senge & Kleiner, 1999). 

Step 4
Full Implementation
Full implementation is reached when 50% or more of the intended practitioners,
staff, or team members are implementing the identiﬁed strategies with ﬁdelity and
seeing strong outcomes for all students. 
During this stage, teams may ask themselves:  
- How will we scale up the professional learning options to meet the needs of the
early adopters as well as those just beginning?  
- How are we using data to reﬁne our system of support?  
- How do we maintain a focus on this work through transitions in leadership?  
After successful implementation, repeat the process with more partners, programs,
and practices! The MTSS process involves continuous monitoring, evaluation, and
improvement to support the success of all students. 


Here is a useful resource from the American Institutes of
Research (AIR) as your district begins MTSS
implementation!

Implementation
Understanding the essential components of MTSS is an important part of its
implementation, but research suggests effective implementation is a major
challenge for educators. Successful implementation of MTSS demands ongoing
planning, continuous improvement, and sustaining and expanding efforts.
READ MORE MTSS4SUCCESS 


Already Have a Multi-tiered System in Place?
Many schools already operate with a preventive, multi-tiered approach to academic
performance (Response to Intervention) or behavior (Positive Behavioral Interventions and
Supports). That's great! This means there is already a foundation in place to integrate a
comprehensive school mental health system. That's right! The multi-tiered approach you are
using applies to mental health too. Here's how!
Implementing a Comprehensive Integrated Multi-Tiered
System of Supports
The MTSS framework is already structured to include policies and interventions that promote
positive student outcomes, prevent problem behaviors, and address factors that put students at
risk. Additionally, an effective MTSS offers early identiﬁcation and support for students who are
at risk of developing mental health issues. 
Integrating school mental health practices into an academic multi-tiered system involves a
systematic process that recognizes the importance of addressing students' positive health and
wellbeing alongside their academic needs. Click through the tabs for an overview of important
steps to consider in this process.

Assess the Current State –
Begin by assessing the current state of the academic MTSS framework and the existing supports
for students' mental health. This includes reviewing the data on student well-being, behavior,
and social-emotional needs, as well as evaluating the effectiveness of any existing mental health
initiatives or interventions.
Establish an MTSS Mental Health Team –
Create a collaborative team consisting of school administrators, teachers, counselors, school
psychologists, social workers, and other relevant stakeholders. This team will be responsible for
planning, implementing, and evaluating the integration of school mental health practices into the
MTSS framework.
Identify Mental Health Needs and Resources –
Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment to identify the mental health needs of students, staff,
and the broader school community. This assessment may involve surveys, interviews, focus
groups, or data analysis. Simultaneously, identify existing mental health resources and supports
available within the school or the community, such as counselors, therapists, or partnerships
with external organizations.
Align Mental Health Practices with MTSS Tiers –
Map out how school mental health practices can be integrated within the existing MTSS
framework. Identify speciﬁc strategies and interventions that can address students' social and
emotional needs at each tier of support (universal, targeted, and intensive). Ensure that mental
health practices are aligned with the academic supports already in place and that they
complement each other.
Develop a Comprehensive Plan –
Based on the needs assessment and alignment with the MTSS framework, develop a
comprehensive plan for integrating school mental health practices. This plan should include
speciﬁc goals, action steps, timelines, and responsibilities for implementation. Consider
strategies such as school wide positive health and wellbeing programs, individual and group
counseling, peer support systems, trauma-informed practices, and family engagement
initiatives.
Enhance Professional Development –
Provide ongoing professional development and training for school staff to equip them with the
knowledge and skills necessary to implement School Mental Health practices effectively. This
training may cover topics such as trauma-informed care, mental health literacy and awareness,
crisis intervention, and effective communication strategies. Foster a culture of support and
collaboration among staff members to promote a holistic approach to student wellbeing.
Foster Collaboration and Communication –
Establish channels of communication and collaboration among the mental health team,
academic MTSS team, and other stakeholders involved in supporting student well-being.
Regularly share progress, exchange feedback, and make data-informed decisions to strengthen
the integration of school mental health practices and continuously improve the overall support
system.
Evaluate and Reffne –
Conduct ongoing evaluations to assess the impact of the integrated school mental health
practices on student outcomes, well-being, and academic success. Seek feedback from students,
staff, and families to gather perspectives and identify areas for improvement. Use evaluation
ﬁndings to reﬁne and enhance the integrated approach over time.

With a strong commitment, schools can effectively integrate school mental health practices
into an existing academic MTSS, creating comprehensive school mental health practices that
support students' positive health and wellbeing alongside their academic growth. This
integration recognizes the interplay between mental health and academic success, promoting a
positive and inclusive school environment for all students.



The Interconnected Systems Framework: What the SBHA is All About!
The foundation for all the work of the School Behavioral Health Team at the University of South
Carolina is the Interconnected Systems Framework (ISF), involving an education-mental health
system partnership to add resources to schools from collaborating community mental health
organizations, and focused speciﬁcally on strengthening districts and schools' MTSS. 
Within an interconnected system, education and mental health leaders and practitioners have
time, space, and funding to plan together, combine resources, and use evidence-based
structures and systems to strengthen community practice.
ISF is a blueprint for building a collaborative mental health and education system. Download the
fact sheet below that focuses on the core features of the ISF approach. 
When School Mental Health is Integrated within an MTSS.pdf
585.2 KB
The ISF in Practice
Take a few minutes and watch the video below explaining ISF and the value of integrating
mental and behavioral health supports. The speakers are Tami Morrow, Jennifer Nelson and
May Henry, all of whom are experienced working within the Interconnected Systems
Framework.
In an interconnected system, all children and families will be able to engage with well-matched,
high-quality educational, mental, and behavioral health programs and services more easily and
quickly than ever. The ISF blueprint grows and adapts with you, the young people, families,
dedicated practitioners, and researchers working with us.
It is the view of the SBHA team that MTSS is best operationalized by the Positive Behavioral
Interventions and Supports (PBIS) evidence-based tiered framework with emphasis on high
quality practices —  effective teams, data-informed decision making, screening and follow-
up to it, implementing and reﬁning evidence-based practices, and progress monitoring
across Tier 1 (promotion/prevention for all students), Tier 2 (early intervention for some
students, classroom supports), and Tier 3 (more intensive individual, group and/or family
intervention). Click here for more information about PBIS.
While in our view, it would be optimal for SC school districts to adopt the PBIS framework,
this is not essential as schools are able to embrace other aspects of effective MTSS
functioning. A critical factor will be having an inclusive and interdisciplinary team, ideally
including student and family voice, intentionally focused on improving the social-
emotional-behavioral functioning of students thus improving academic performance, and
systematically organizing and providing infrastructure for the MTSS. 
Integrating mental health practices into an MTSS is an
important step in promoting the overall well-being and
success of students. Click on the locations along the
roadmap for the basics of effective comprehensive
school mental health within an MTSS.
Commitment:
A successful integration of behavioral health services will require the commitment of district community
leadership teams that seek wide-scale adoption of comprehensive school mental health systems.
Funding:
Diverse and leveraged funding and continuous monitoring of new funding opportunities from national,
state, and local sources to support a sustainable comprehensive school behavioral health system.
Tiered System:
A full array of tiered, evidence-based processes, policies and practices, a MTSS, that promotes mental
health and reduces the prevalence and severity of mental illness by ensuring mental health and behavioral
interventions, just like academic instructional interventions, are available in varying intensities.
Resource Mapping:
Resource mapping offers schools and districts a comprehensive view of school and community services
and resources available to students and families. Having a systematic process that helps individuals better
understand specific details about the types of services offered, and how and when they can be accessed,
can improve student follow-through with services and coordination of care. You will learn more about
resource mapping in the Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment lesson coming up!
Evidence-based Practices:
Use of evidence-based and emerging best practices to ensure quality in the services and supports provided
to students.
Data-informed Decision Making:
Use of data to monitor student needs and progress, assess quality of implementation, and evaluate the
effectiveness of supports and services.
Screening:
Use of screening and referral as a strategy for early identification and treatment. We will discuss more
about screening later in this course! 
Well-Trained Educators and Specialized Support Personnel:
A full complement of school and district professionals, including specialized support personnel, who are
well-trained to support the mental health needs of students in the school setting. Teams also include
representation from mental health community partners working cohesively to broaden the availability of
support to students and families, enhancing access to mental health care. The roles and responsibilities of
community partners will differ based on unique resources and needs of schools, and are determined by
leadership teams.


We Are Here for You! 
The roadmap may be intimidating - building and sustaining an MTSS is no easy task! That's where the rest of this course comes in. As you progress, you will gain operational knowledge of the following MTSS practices: 
1. Using the Tiered Delivery System
2. Team-based Leadership
3. Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment
4. Data-informed Decision Making
5. Screening for Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Functioning

During the implementation of MTSS, schools must purposefully foster a sense of support and inclusivity for
all individuals. As such, to examine this further we included lessons in: 
1. Strengthening School-Family-Community-Partnerships
2. Cultural Competence in the School Setting

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- High-quality differentiated instruction: this component emphasizes the
importance of tailoring instruction to meet the diverse needs of students.

- Meaningful assessment, screening, and progress monitoring: To effectively
implement MTSS, schools need to have robust assessment systems in place. This
includes conducting universal screenings to identify students who may require
additional support, as well as regularly monitoring students' progress to determine
if interventions are effective. Assessment data can inform decision-making and
help educators identify the speciﬁc needs of students, leading to targeted
interventions.

- Identifying, selecting, translating and evaluating evidenced-based prevention and
intervention programs and practices: Schools implementing MTSS need to identify
and select appropriate evidence-based prevention and intervention programs and
strategies that align with the needs of their students.

- Professional development: Teachers and staff need training on topics such as
differentiated instruction, assessment and progress monitoring, mental health
literacy, selecting and implementing evidence-based practices, and intervention
ﬁdelity. Professional development equips and empowers educators with the
knowledge and skills necessary to support the needs of their students.

- Intervention ﬁdelity: As you know, implementing interventions with ﬁdelity refers
to ensuring that interventions are delivered consistently and as intended.

- Establish channels of communication and collaboration among the mental health
and academic MTSS teams: Regularly share progress, exchange feedback, and make
data-informed decisions to strengthen the integration of school mental health
practices and continuously improve the overall support system.

Addressing these core components establishes a strong foundation for implementing an
effective and sustainable MTSS. This comprehensive approach ensures that all students receive
high-quality instruction, targeted interventions, and the support they need to thrive
academically, behaviorally, and socially.
When done well, MTSS will have a positive impact on you, your
students, and your school community. 
Now, let's get started!

@@@@@
Lesson 2 of 2
Using the Tiered Delivery System

Using the Tiered Delivery System
Outcomes:
1. Explore practical applications of the MTSS framework
2. Walk through MTSS implementation speciﬁc to each of the three tiers
3. Recognize the importance of layering support from each tier based on students'
individual needs
MTSS in Action
Exploring Practical Applications of the MTSS Framework
Person driving using GPS mounted on the dashboard
Theory into practice
Putting the MTSS framework into practice requires a systematic and collaborative approach
involving educators, administrators, support staff, parents, and the wider school community.
Now that we have covered the basics of an MTSS framework, let's explore its practical
applications.


Aligning Support With Student Needs
Aligning support with student needs within the tiered approach of the MTSS framework
promotes personalization, targeted intervention, effcient resource allocation, preventive and
early intervention, student engagement, and a positive school climate. By understanding and
responding to the unique needs of students, educators can provide the right support at the right
time, maximizing student success and wellbeing. 
Selecting Evidence-based Interventions Across Tiers
The number of available evidence-based practices can be extremely overwhelming. We will talk
in more detail about the term "evidence-based" in just a moment, but for now, let's look at
some strategies practitioners use when looking to choose the most appropriate ones.

Match the intervention with the current problem.:
Selected intervention should be designed for the identiﬁed problem. Special attention should
be given to evaluating the effectiveness of the intervention for your students and the current
issue to be addressed (Merrell & Buchanan, 2006). This means regularly assessing progress
to ensure that the chosen strategies are having the intended impact. 

Consider modular vs. manualized interventions.:
Manualized interventions with pre-made lessons can help take the guesswork out of
intervention planning and practice. Qualiﬁed staff can simply follow the lessons. However,
these types of interventions typically need to be followed completely. This can be time-
consuming, or it may not be feasible in some situations.  
Using modular behavior strategies have been found to help teams target speciﬁc issues and
combine strategies as needed. In a randomized control trial of a modular treatment for
children with depression, anxiety, and conduct problems, the modular treatment was more
effective than other standard evidence-based treatments (Weisz et al., 2012). A more in-
depth exploration of manualized vs modular intervention approaches for Tier 3 intervention
practitioners can be found in the SBHA "Growing Your Tier 3 Supports" course.

Compare open source vs. proprietary programs.:
Another concern when selecting interventions is cost. Proprietary programs can be
expensive and usually require instruction from their own trainers. The good news is there
are many evidence-based interventions that are offered at little or no cost! Using
interventions available in the public domain avoids expensive and time-consuming
trainings, subscriptions, and losing access to materials if the subscription is not renewed.

Once the MTSS team has selected interventions, the process does not stop there! Because MTSS
is a data-informed framework, teams can choose to change interventions if things are not
working as expected.
The Importance of Using Evidence-based Practices
It is the responsibility of the MTSS team to review the available evidence-based practices and
interventions that line up with the identiﬁed needs of the students. The term evidence-
based comes up a lot when we discuss MTSS. This means understanding and using
instructional practices, interventions, and approaches grounded in research that have
demonstrated effectiveness in addressing speciﬁc challenges while promoting student learning
and achievement. Watch this short video as Kelly Perales, Co-director of the Midwest PBIS
Network, explains more about evidence-based practices.
As Kelly mentioned in the video, evidence-based interventions are an important piece of getting
to the intended outcome for our students, whether it's to improve their school attendance,
reduce their depression symptoms, or teach them how to positively seek attention from adults
and peers at school. 
You also heard again about the importance of ﬁdelity, the degree to which interventions and
practices are implemented as intended. If intervention ﬁdelity is poor and students are not
making progress, it's easy to get frustrated and want to give up. Making sure there are solid
ﬁdelity measures guarantees accurate implementation of interventions and positive outcomes.
The importance of ﬁdelity in all aspects of the MTSS framework cannot be stressed enough. It
ensures that students receive the intended beneﬁts of the interventions and helps maximize the
effectiveness and impact of school-based mental health support. When interventions are
implemented with ﬁdelity, educators can accurately assess their effectiveness, monitor student
progress, and make informed decisions about adjustments or modiﬁcations.
Combining evidence-based practices with ﬁdelity within the MTSS framework ensures that
students receive high-quality interventions that have a proven track record of success. This
approach promotes consistency, accountability, and continuous improvement in supporting
the academic, behavioral, and social-emotional needs of all students.

Moving Through the Tiered System
Guidance at Each Level
Educators can better navigate the pathway to effectively meet the diverse needs of all students
by understanding the levels of support within the tiered approach. Let's take a short walk
through each tier of the MTSS framework and discuss the keys to optimizing educational
outcomes for every learner and pitfalls to avoid during implementation. 

Building the Foundation With Tier 1
The foundation of the MTSS framework is Tier 1. When your universal Tier 1 supports are
strong, most students are getting what they need. If there is a long line of students outside the
administrator's offce most days, that can be a clue that your Tier 1 may need more attention!
Perhaps the needs of the student population have changed, or there is a problem with ﬁdelity. In
any case, the MTSS team should review the data and ﬁnd out what needs to be addressed.
We all can agree that in every school "building a positive school climate is a central task and
involves the entire school community" (Bradshaw et al., 2009). For this to happen, Tier 1
activities must include programs that promote family and student engagement, cultivate
awareness and adherence to school-wide expectations, and incorporate practices to improve
overall wellbeing and alleviate stress among administrators, faculty, staff, and students.
Tier 1 activities happen consistently, not only in the classrooms but in a school-wide fashion,
with buy-in and support from school administrators. For example, some schools hold weekly or
monthly "town hall" style meetings. These can be a great way to bring the school community
together to discuss important topics such as mental health literacy and behavior expectations
while celebrating students who show positive behaviors. Think beyond a pep rally-style
gathering here. While we can have fun and create excitement about school spirit, we can also be
intentional about using evidence-based curriculum materials to teach positive social,
emotional, and behavioral skills.
If you are wondering how to fft these Tier 1 activities
into an already busy school day, check out the ideas
below!
- The morning meeting/advisory period are opportunities for intentional
community-building activities. Activities can include relationship-building and
sharing activities, reviewing classroom and school procedures, and mini-lessons
on character development and mental health literacy.
- School counselors can be a great resource for games and activities to use with
students.
- Talk with the media specialist about a related book to use during an English
Language Arts (or other content area) lesson. This is one way to infuse social skills
instruction into required academic content blocks. Time is our most precious
resource, so accomplishing two goals with one lesson is a win for everyone!

Consider including older students in the discussion, where developmentally appropriate and
with family approval. Students themselves can offer powerful insight into what they think they
need to be successful!
Overhead image of a group of students standing in a circle with arms linked
Implementing Tier 1 MTSS programming can be complex, and schools may encounter challenges that can hinder its effectiveness. Watch out for these common pitfalls of Tier 1 implementation.
- Tier 1 is more than hanging up a poster! While posters can be great instructional tools and reminders around our school building, they do not take the place of consistent, school-wide instruction with an evidence-based social skills curriculum.
- Tier 1 cannot be implemented well for your unique school population without planning. The planning stage is one of the
most crucial aspects of Tier 1. Your MTSS team is compiling data, completing a needs assessment, and thinkingcritically about the needs of
your students and families.
- Setting up Tier 1 supports is not a one-time task. As our populations and their needs change, so also
should we look at our data to see if the needs and interventions still fft. If not, our MTSS team goes back to
the needs assessment and makes changes based on the ffndings.

To address these pitfalls, schools should provide ongoing support and professional
development, establish clear expectations and guidelines, foster a collaborative culture, allocate
adequate time and resources, utilize data effectively, and ensure a sustained commitment to Tier
1 implementation. 


Tapping Into Resources
Implementing Tier 1 programming involves collaborative effort from within and outside of the
school building. By tapping into these combined resources, schools can effectively establish a
strong foundation for all students, promoting their well-being and academic success. 
Here are some insightful tips to help identify and effectively use available school community
assets as well as external community resources. 
Use the Resources Around You –
Don’t forget to build on all the resources in your school community. Support staff like your
school counselor, psychologist, and social worker often have great ideas to support the school
climate!
Seek Extra Materials –
School counselors usually have extra materials and information to support their guidance
lessons. For secondary students, school counselors can point you in the direction of other social-
emotional resources. Don't forget to ask for their help!
Keep an Open Mind –
Be open to the richness of the vast resources within the full school community. 
Stay in Tune with the Community –
You may also ﬁnd great resources outside of the school building via community partners (e.g.,
recreational centers, faith-based groups, non-proﬁts, businesses).
Essentially, a successful MTSS relies on a strong Tier 1 foundation to create a nurturing,
responsive, and inclusive educational environment that beneﬁts all students. By focusing on
universal supports, schools lay the groundwork for effective intervention, collaboration, and
continuous improvement, ultimately leading to better outcomes for students and the
sustainability of the MTSS framework. If you recognize that your school needs to build or
enhance practices at Tier 1, we've made it easy for you to gain more detailed information! Be
sure to take our SBHA course "Building the Foundation at Tier 1."


Bridging Supports With Tier 2 
A cartoon river and trees that says "Tier 2."
Now that your Tier 1 supports are strong and functioning well in your school, most of your
students are getting what they need. They are following school and classroom procedures and
making academic and social progress. However, you will have students who need additional
supports. This is where we provide Tier 2 supports.

Getting Tier 2 Support
Requesting assistance for a student who may need Tier 2 supports can come from a variety of
sources. Families, classroom teachers, or other school staff can reach out for support if they
have concerns. Other sources, like school discipline records or a social and emotional screening
measure, can also suggest that some students may need extra help. 
If the MTSS team believes a student needs Tier 2 interventions, the next step is gathering
baseline data. A staff member, usually the classroom teacher, gathers data on the concerning
behaviors of the student. This allows the MTSS team to know how the student's behavior looks
now and how it is impacting their academic and social skills. Sometimes, baseline data can be
surprising! The concerning behavior may need to be addressed, but at times the data shows us
that it is not as bad as we thought. Allow your team to go where the data takes you!
The most important thing to consider when referring a student to Tier 2 MTSS intervention is
the availability of the data that supports the need for additional support. It is imperative to
gather and analyze relevant data, such as academic assessments, behavior observations, and
progress monitoring, to ensure that the student meets the criteria for Tier 2 interventions. This
data-informed decision making process helps ensure that students receive the appropriate level
of support and that interventions are targeted toward their speciﬁc needs.
If the baseline data shows a consistent behavior issue that needs an intervention, the team can
select an evidence-based intervention and track the student's progress. When appropriate
supports are in place, progress monitoring should be fast and simple. You will ﬁnd more
information about progress monitoring in the lesson titled "Data-informed Decision Making."

Applying Tier 2 Strategies
Identifying a speciﬁc student need is central to choosing a corresponding support or strategy.
For example, small skill-building groups are one type of Tier 2 strategy used to address needs
ranging from social issues (e.g., friendship building), to family concerns (e.g., children coping
with divorce), to academics (e.g., work completion). 
What might this look like when put into action? 
At some schools, the school counselor may see a group of ﬁve students two days a week for
twenty minutes to teach friendship-making skills. The counselor may also visit classrooms or
recess to help students practice their skills in real-time. To collect progress monitoring data,
the counselor could ask the classroom teachers of the students to ﬁll out a quick electronic
form at the end of each day or week to rate their social skills.
Another example might be a school's use of Check-In/Check-Out (CICO). You might have heard
of CICO, a very popular and effective Tier 2 intervention. CICO is a structured system of daily goal
setting, data collection, and debrieﬁng.  
According to Filter and colleagues (2022), the 5 main practice elements of CICO are:
1. Pre-teaching with the student
2. Morning check-in
3. Teacher rating and feedback
4. Afternoon check-out
5. Home communication
You will have the opportunity to learn more about CICO in the Tier 2 course, but you can
download the following fact sheet from Vanderbilt University CICO resources for a breakdown of
the steps and a sample behavior chart.

Challenges When Implementing Tier 2 Supports
Take a look at some common issues with implementing CICO and other Tier 2 interventions.
Flip the ﬂashcards below for some strategies to address a few common pitfalls of Tier 2
interventions.
1. Not enough adult support: When thinking about stafffng needs for Tier 2 interventions, consider
helping students form relationships with other adults in the building.
Offfce staff, cafeteria staff, and other staff are all great choices!
2. Think beyond the classroom teacher: In some cases, classroom teachers may not be the best
choice to facilitate an intervention. For example, if a student participating in CICO
doesn't earn their reward, it may be hard on the student-teacher relationship. Another
adult may be a better choice to facilitate CICO.
3. Don't forget to have back-up: With so many stafffng issues, it's
important that we have back-up for our intervention facilitators. We
know consistency is best, so we want to be able to continue the
intervention even when some staff are absent for a day or two.
Let's connect with Cat Raulerson, trained school psychologist and part of Florida's PBIS Project,
as she explains where Tier 2 level supports ﬁt in.
As Cat explains, Tier 2 works in conjunction with Tier 1 and Tier 3. It is the important middle
ground so that students don't fall through the cracks.

Duration and Data-informed Decision Making at Tier 2
When we talk about intervention implementation and ﬁdelity, we
may wonder about the optimal amount of time for maintaining Tier 2
support before determining that there needs to be another course of
action. These next steps might include reducing support, continuing
with universal Tier 1 strategies, changing intervention that may not
be as effective, or increasing support with Tier 3 intervention. 
For academic interventions, state departments of education tend to
recommend 6-8 weeks of implementation before deciding to make
any changes. 
As you know, measuring behavioral skills is not as clear-cut as
measuring academic progress.
When looking at recommendations from U.S. state departments of
education, there is not much agreement on how long students should
stay in Tier 2 or 3, or how often we should collect data (Briesch et al.,
2019). When measuring behavior, remember that environmental
factors like time of day, how hard the student thinks a task is, and
peer inﬂuences can have big impacts. Data collection and review
might need to happen more often than it would when measuring
academic progress. The team can then use the data to decide on the
next steps. Here are a few ways this might look:
If the data shows the following:
TABLE HERE

Remember that this process doesn't have to go in a straight line! Although we
typically want to move from Tier 1 to Tier 2 to Tier 3, in keeping with the student's
data, there may be emergency or complicated situations where the team jumps to a
higher level of support. It's about meeting the student where they are. 

Where Do FBAs and BIPs Fit in Here?
Shifting our focus from academic interventions to behavioral interventions, we encounter a
distinct challenge in evaluating progress and determining the most effective strategies.
Functional Behavior Assessments (FBAs) are Tier 2 and Tier 3 tools where data is collected on
“ABCs” of the problem behavior (antecedents, behavior, and consequences). FBAs help us learn
what may be triggering the problem behavior and see things in the environment that reinforce
or make the behavior happen more often. Although FBAs are frequently conducted in schools
and are mandated under certain circumstances for special education students, there is little
guidance from most state departments of education on the required components for FBAs. 
In a survey of practicing school psychologists (Johnson et al., 2019), these were the most
common pieces of FBA data:  
Based on the FBA results, the team can come together to develop ideas about the function of the
behavior (e.g., attention, escape, etc.) and targeted strategies or interventions to address the
problem. Think about making an FBA a group effort for the MTSS team, rather than having one
person gather all the information. This makes the process more effcient and allows for
different perspectives on the student's behavior. As a result of the FBA, one intervention might
be a behavior intervention plan (BIP) that includes:  
- Adding environmental supports to prevent the problem behavior as much as
possible
- Teaching the student more appropriate replacement behaviors that have a similar
function (such as adult attention) to the problem behavior 
- Reinforcing positive behaviors
- Using consequences carefully to make the problem behavior less effective in meeting the student's needs

Tip: When developing replacement behaviors, think about what your students are
ready to learn. Often, students need to be taught skills that lead up to bigger skills.
For instance, if we want a student to play in a developmentally appropriate way with
others, we might need to teach them how to take turns ffrst.
To summarize Tier 2, it is for the purpose of identifying and responding to student needs in a
timely manner, implementing small group interventions, supplementing core instruction,
monitoring progress, fostering collaboration, and maintaining ﬂexibility. When a student
requires more focused support beyond the universal level, the MTSS framework process of
increased intensity at Tier 2 will contribute to reducing academic and behavioral diffculties. See
the complete Tier 2 course, "Bridging Supports with Tier 2" for more detailed information on
Tier 2 practices and resources.


Growing Your Tier 3 Supports
Tier 3 is our most intensive level of support. Interventions are individualized to reach students
who have not responded as we hoped to Tier 1 and 2 supports. At Tier 3, teams should look
carefully at what is driving a student's problem behaviors so the root cause can be addressed. As
we said earlier, an FBA is one useful tool to gather more in-depth information about student
behavior and the factors inﬂuencing it. 
At the heart of Tier 3 is individualizing our approach. Because students in need of Tier 3 support
did not pick up social and coping skills from the school-wide Tier 1 instruction or Tier 2 skill-
building groups, we need to go deeper and really tailor our intervention to the unique needs of
the student. The last course, "Growing Your Tier 3 Supports," will provide detailed information on
Tier 3 interventions and practices for the behavioral and mental health practitioners and staff in
your school and community.
Tip: Remember that students do not exist in a bubble! They are a part of families,
schools, and communities. Be sure to learn about their experiences and strengths.
You can build upon these skills while working on problem behaviors.

Communicating With Families About Students' Needs
Families might be worried about the amount of time it takes to carry out interventions and look
for progress. Families care about their children and want to see them do well. At times, their
worry may come across as frustration. Your school team may ﬁnd it helpful to include families
in decision making meetings to discuss intervention planning for their child. Involving families
also helps build collaboration between home and school as we work together to support
students' learning and behavior skills. Families can give input on: 
- what they think their child needs
- what works at home
- their child's likes and dislikes

Below are some effective ways to keep families informed about student progress. Click for
details about each suggestion. 
Behavior charts –
Track a child's behavior daily or weekly using a behavior chart. These can be paper or electronic.
You may wish to take a photo or make a copy of paper charts for the child's data collection ﬁle
before sending them home.
Electronic forms –
Electronic forms can be created and completed by school staff. You can share the data from these
forms with families via email.
Notes in the agenda book –
If your school provides agenda books, you can write families a quick note there. As with paper
behavior charts, you can keep a copy or photo to add to the student's data collection ﬁle.
Texts/emails/phone calls –
Texts, emails, and phone calls are all great ways to update families on student progress. Be sure
to check in with families about their communication preference so your messages reach them.
We should also include positive communications with families. A quick phone call or text to
highlight how a child handled a tough situation or used a new skill can be so powerful!
Tip: Automate reminders wherever you can! Scheduling alarms and calendar alerts
for yourself and your colleagues can help us be consistent with our communication
with families and each other.



Layering Tiered Supports
Balancing Support from Each Tier
When all tiers of MTSS are fully operational, there is a lot going on at once! Tier 1 supports are
always happening at the school-wide level to reach every student. For students receiving Tier 2
and Tier 3 interventions, there are additional layers of support happening for them, in addition
to the Tier 1 supports. Once a student moves to Tier 2 or 3, Tier 1 does not stop for them. The key
concept of the tiered approach is that supports are layered, and as students move through the
tiers, they receive increasingly individualized and intensive interventions while continuing to
beneﬁt from the foundational supports.
This approach acknowledges that students' needs exist on a continuum and may require
different levels of support at different times.

Teaming for Student Success
Clear and consistent communication about student progress is key to identifying any potential
issues and keeping the system running. We have to communicate with one another for MTSS to
work.
Regular, brief meetings including classroom teachers, administrators, school mental health
support staff (counselors, psychologists, social workers), and other interventionists are
incredibly important for sharing data, problem-solving as a group, and discussing the student
holistically. 
Below we have provided the Team Implementation Checklist (TIC; Sugai et al., 2011). It is a free
online tool to assess teaming structures in your school and identify areas of strength and places
to improve. Click below to check it out! We will also discuss teaming in much more detail in the
next lesson Team-Based Leadership!

Remember that MTSS in your district and school will change and evolve over time. As the needs
of students and families change, so will the interventions and implementation. Change is a part
of the process.  Listen to Kiana Longnecker, behavior support consultant, as she gives some
very encouraging closing remarks about implementing MTSS tiered supports.

Let's review the lesson.
- The tiered system of support emphasizes early intervention and support, ensuring
that students receive the assistance they need before challenges escalate. By
implementing MTSS, districts can create a responsive and inclusive educational
environment that maximizes student success.
- The practical application of the tiered approach involves continuous progress
monitoring to assess student performance and determine appropriate levels of
support. Data-driven decision making guides educators in identifying students who
require additional intervention and adjusting strategies accordingly. 
- Collaboration and coordination among educators, support staff, families, and
community resources are essential for successful implementation. Communication
and information sharing enhance the support provided to students, ensuring a
comprehensive approach to addressing their academic, behavioral, and social-
emotional needs. 
- All tiers of support within the MTSS framework are intended to work collaboratively
and complement each other to provide a comprehensive system of support for
students.
EXIT COURSE




*****
Core MTSS Practices- 1.2
This course is designed to provide educators and school professionals with a
comprehensive understanding of core MTSS and integration of school mental
health practices while emphasizing the importance of developing cultural
competence, cultural humility, and fostering strong community and family
partnerships. These practices are a necessary part of creating an inclusive and
supportive learning environment that meets the diverse needs of all students.  
Get ready to embark on a transformative journey that will empower you to build a
more equitable and effective educational experience for your students and their
families. 
Team-Based Leadership
Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Team-Based Leadership
Outcomes:
1. Review the beneﬁts of team-based leadership within MTSS
2. Identify team members and central activities of the District Community Leadership
Team (DCLT)
3. Examine school-based leadership team roles and responsibilities
4. Discover best practices for team meetings and team-based problem-solving
5. Recognize how district-school collaboration impacts MTSS quality and sustainability



Together is Better
A Team-Based Leadership Approach to Implementing Core MTSS
It's always better to travel together. 
When you don't have to rely on yourself for everything from Point A to Point B, you get where
you're going faster and safer. That's why teams, especially among leadership, are a core part of
developing the MTSS roadmap. 
What does this mean practically? 
MTSS is not just about tiered interventions. It is about how all the systems (district, schools,
families and community) connect to ensure high-quality education for all students. 
A team-based leadership approach means building a strong team with a shared mission and
commitment. It involves bringing together important people from the school and community
who are affected by the outcomes in the school. These people are also known as stakeholders!
Stakeholders come together to talk about ideas, set goals, ﬁnd opportunities, solve problems,
and make decisions. 
The main goal of team-based leadership is to work together and achieve shared objectives. 
Within a strong, effective team, you can typically see three primary characteristics:
Consistent and Relevant Communication –
This approach includes coming together at the same time and sharing information with all
members. What is going to be done? How is it going to be done? What is the purpose of the
group's efforts? With a solid, agreed-upon vision the group is motivated individually and
collectively. Clear and transparent communication accelerates understanding and allows the
team to move forward with uniﬁed goals. 
Mutual Accountability –
Within a team-based leadership approach, roles and responsibilities are assigned collaboratively.
Effective teaming includes holding each other accountable and showing personal investment by
engaging, acting, and providing support. This accountability contributes to cohesiveness within
all systems and ensures initiatives are carried out with ﬁdelity. Accountability drives change. 
Shared Commitment –
The team is fully committed to identifying and solving problems. Those identiﬁed as "team
leads" have been designated with the authority to make sound decisions, act, and get things done
faster. It is key to have a team with the power to implement policy and procedural changes. 

The success of a MTSS framework within a school district relies on building a leadership team
that promotes thoughtful, effective, and sustainable implementation of MTSS practices
and strategies throughout a school district.
It is imperative that MTSS leadership teams exist at each part of the system (state,
district, and school building) and are committed to consistent, long-term implementation
of MTSS.
Let’s now move forward and look at teams at two distinct yet interconnected levels: the district
and the school.  




The District 
The Strong Foundation On Which School-Level Teaming Stands
While your school setting may seem like the starting point for teaming, teaming actually starts
at the district level! The district level team, also known as "District Community Leadership
Team" or DCLT, supports the school-wide teams through resources, policies, and open
communication!  
Think of your DCLT as the place you go to get the tools needed to build the roadmap. The unique
features of the DCLT is that it, and the individuals on it, have the responsibility to: 
- reallocate resources  
- change policy  
- sustain and scale the key elements of the MTSS
A DCLT is strongest when it is built on the principles of representation and collaboration. The
remainder of this lesson will provide resources and information to inform your identiﬁcation of
DCLT members and identify tools to support strong district/school MTSS collaboration. To
start, we will break down who is on the team before moving onto the functions of the team and
then how to implement those functions effectively.  

Who is on the DCLT?
Whether you are an existing member of a leadership team or a champion for MTSS in your
building, having a keen awareness of the functions of the DCLT is key as this team actively
supports and guides MTSS implementation efforts across all Tiers. An understanding of who is
on the team is the starting point for knowing what that team's function is!   
As the name implies, the DCLT includes representation from both district leaders and
community partners. A DCLT includes partners who have a shared commitment and can make
decisions that support positive outcomes in the schools and the community.  
You may already have a group that resembles a DCLT but call it by another name, and this is
totally ﬁne! It is always good practice to assess your existing resources and see how you can
blend or adapt them to the MTSS framework.  
To complete the mission, the team needs to have representatives from all key stakeholders.
Let’s take a closer look now! 

What is Meant by "Stakeholder(s)"?
In general, a "stakeholder" refers to any person or group who is positively or negatively
impacted by a project, initiative, policy or organization. They could be internal (people within
your organization) or external (people outside of your organization). In the implementation
of an MTSS framework, stakeholders are those most impacted by the outcomes. Diverse
stakeholders include district-level administration, school-level representatives, students,
families, and community partners.

Identifying and Recruiting Key Stakeholders
The composition of your stakeholder group will depend on the unique context of your school
community. Seek out individuals who can serve as champions and critical friends, who can
bring diverse skills and perspectives, and who can serve the school in a variety of capacities. 
The number of stakeholders should be large enough to include an array of perspectives, but
small enough for all stakeholders to make meaningful contributions to the process.
Think about the students that your school serves and make certain that the stakeholder
group includes representatives who can speak authentically to their perspectives and needs,
particularly those who have been historically marginalized (African American/Black, Latinx,
English learners, students with disabilities, etc.). 

Here are a few tips for gathering stakeholder input suggested by the Massachusetts Department
of Elementary and Secondary Education's Turnaround Practices. 

Turnaround Practices
Tip 1
Seek Input Early
Begin seeking stakeholder input early in the process of planning so that stakeholders
can make recommendations to inform the direction and priorities of your plan.
Tip 2
Conduct a Series of Meetings
Many districts and schools gather stakeholder input through a series of meetings,
which provides ample time for discussion of context, challenges, and opportunities. 
Tip 3
Facilitate
When convening discussions among groups of stakeholders, consider identifying a
skilled facilitator to guide the group's discussion and to document group
recommendations. Whenever communication is a barrier, there should also be an
interpreter available to support stakeholders not ﬂuent in English 
Tip 4
Share Meeting Information
It has proven to be important for meetings to include a published/shared agenda,
attendance records, notes/minutes, and a written set of recommendations, all
translated to support stakeholders who are not ﬂuent in English.
Tip 5
