
School Climate / Social & Emotional Assessment
The Washoe County School District Social and Emotional Competency
Assessments (WCSD-SECAs) are free, open-source instruments that measure
the self-reported social and emotional competencies of students in grades 5-12.
The WCSD-SECA instruments were developed through a collaboration among
WCSD, the Collaborative for Academic and Social and Emotional Learning
(CASEL), and the University of Illinois at Chicago through an Institute of
Education Sciences Research-Practitioner Partnership grant.
READ MORE WASHOESCHOOLS 


Let's review the lesson.
- Universal screening is applied in the school setting for many different outcomes,
including social-emotional-behavioral health.
- The purpose of universal SEB screening is to identify students who may be at-risk
for SEB concerns, such as behavior disorders or mental illnesses.
- Universal SEB screening is proactive and preventative, identifying needs that may
have otherwise gone undetected.
- There are many considerations for implementing screening processes in your
school, including the evidence base for the screening tool, affordability, and
feasibility of implementation.
- High-quality screening tools are valid, reliable, and statistically sound.
- There are many screening tools available for use. Considering the needs and
resources of your school will impact which screeners are most appropriate for your
use. 
EXIT COURSE



*****
Core MTSS Practices-1.4
This course is designed to provide educators and school professionals with a
comprehensive understanding of core MTSS and integration of school mental
health practices while emphasizing the importance of developing cultural
competence, cultural humility, and fostering strong community and family
partnerships. These practices are a necessary part of creating an inclusive and
supportive learning environment that meets the diverse needs of all students.  
Get ready to embark on a transformative journey that will empower you to build a
more equitable and effective educational experience for your students and their
families. 
- Strengthening School-Family-Community Partnerships
- Cultural Competence in the School Setting


@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Strengthening School-Family-Community
Partnerships
Outcomes:
1. Establish the importance of family and community connections
2. Evaluate framework approaches to school-family-community involvement 
3. Identify strategies for implementing school-family-community involvement at each
tier of MTSS
4. Review tools and resources for assessing school-family-community partnerships

What are School-Family-Community Partnerships?
Fostering a Collaborative and Supportive Environment
Schools, families, and communities all play a central role in supporting children's success and
wellbeing. In this lesson, we will learn how to make the most of these resources by working
together as a team! To start, let’s review what school-family-community partnerships are.
Deffnition: School-family-community partnerships involve a collaborative relationship
between families, educators, providers, and community partners to support student
learning and improve the health of every learner.  
From this foundational deﬁnition, school-family-community partnerships can grow in their
own unique ways, especially as different schools, families, and communities engage in
partnerships to meet their unique needs. A great example of how school-family-community
partnerships can differ from one another is who is included within those partnerships.   

Families can include: 
- any caretakers or people with signiﬁcant relationships with
children 
- biological or adoptive parents, step-parents, or guardians who
are primary caretakers
- family members such as siblings, grandparents, aunts, uncles, or
others
- any other community members with signiﬁcant relationships to
students, such as close family friends

Sometimes, school-family involvement is also referred to as parent-
school involvement. The term “families” is preferred here because it
is more inclusive of various family structures, such as adoptive
parents, grandparents, step-parents, and many other family
members who step in to support children in the community.

Community partners may include: 
- health organizations (mental health centers, pediatrician’s offces, etc.)
- local businesses
- non-proﬁt organizations (local foodbanks, homeless shelters, libraries, etc.)
- any other community organizations that support students
The previous lesson on team-based leadership discussed how creating the roadmap with teams
at the district and school level is key; the same applies here! Families and communities are
crucial partners as the journey to MTSS is embarked upon. Now that we’ve established a base
deﬁnition of what school-family-community partnerships are, let’s look at the how behind
them!


Involving or Engaging?
Imagine trying to build a roadmap with a partner that you do not speak to. Saying it'd be a
challenge puts it lightly! It is important for communication to ﬂow back and forth from families
to schools and from schools to families. Trust is built over time and develops as families become
comfortable with the school supporting their child and schools feel the same way towards
families.  
In other words, families and schools build partnerships by being engaged with one another.
However, engagement may be substituted for involvement. Let’s look at the differences between
involvement and engagement now! 
IMAGE HERE
Differences between involvement and engagement, adapted from the Michigan
Department of Education (2020) 
The main difference here is that engagement helps us form an equal, two-way partnership,
rather than a hierarchical or one-way relationship. One way to think about this is the distinction
between doing things for or to families compared to doing things with them as equal partners. 
The transition from involvement to engagement can sound vague and unattainable; let’s look at
some activities that families and communities can participate in as a way to engage with the
school. Epstein et. al (1995) provide six areas of opportunity for partnership: 
1. Parenting: help all families establish home environments to support children as
students 
2. Communicating: design effective forms of school-to-home and home-to-school
communications about school programs and children's progress 
3. Volunteering: recruit and organize parent help and support 
4. Learning at Home: provide information and ideas to families about how to help
students at home with homework and other curriculum-related activities,
decisions, and planning 
5. Decision Making: include parents in school decisions, developing parent leaders
and representatives (representation on MTSS teams) 
6. Collaborating with the Community: identify and integrate resources and services
from the community to strengthen school programs, family practices, and student
learning and development

Click through the ffashcards to see examples of
meaningful engagement! 
Parenting: Family support groups, Workshops on parenting skills, Parent education
Communicating: Parent-teacher conferences, Newsletters, report cards, or student work sent home, Calls, text messages, or emails
about school events, Translators provided as needed
Volunteering: Family support at school events,  Partnering with local charities or service organizations
Learning at Home: Information about curriculum, homework, or class activities, Summer learning, such as
summer reading, Calendars with suggested activities
Decision Making: Parent-teacher organization or association (PTO/PTA), District Community Leadership Team (DCLT)
Councils and committees with family inclusion, Seeking out and applying feedback
Collaborating: Information and referrals for community programs (arts, sports, summer activities, etc.)
Service organization partnerships, Alumni programs

Before we move onto focus on the "why" we ought to partner with families speciﬁcally, reﬂect
on your own setting and think of which examples of meaningful engagement would best ﬁt
your community!

If everyone is moving forward together, then success
takes care of itself.
Henry Ford, American Industrialist



Why Partner with Families? 
Unlocking the Power of Collaboration: The Beneﬁts of School-Family Partnerships
Now that we have a better idea of what family partnerships are, let's take a look at some of the
reasons why family engagement is mutually beneﬁcial. First, review the following video which
highlights a successful parent-school relationship. In this video, you’ll meet Mardee King who
has been the student services coordinator for Medical Lake School District in Washington for
over 30 years. You’ll also meet Nikki, a parent and family partner in the Medical Lake School
District as well as a mother, grandmother, and advocate for one of her children who is
diagnosed with ASD and ADHD. 
Following the video, we will walk through more reasons why school-family-community
partnerships are key throughout your MTSS. 
As you saw in the video, family involvement can play a powerful role in improving our schools.
Let’s take a closer look at some of the ways family engagement can make our schools stronger.

Successful family engagement can: 
Increase Equitable Outcomes –
Schools are part of diverse communities with many types of people of different races, cultures,
and identities. Engaging all community members can help promote an understanding and respect
for diversity in the school environment. Including family voice and choice, and ensuring that all
cultures are represented, helps to create a better connection between the community children
live in and the schools they attend. Inclusion of all voices also creates an environment of mutual
respect where all perspectives are valued. 
Increase Effectiveness of Interventions –
Engaging with families is also helpful for students who receive interventions. Engagement helps
because many interventions involve parent/caregiver support, such as Parent-Child Interaction
Therapy (PCIT). Even when interventions do not require direct family support, having parents
and families on the same page as school-based providers can help support treatment and enable
students to reach goals faster. 
Improve Academic Outcomes –
While students spend a signiﬁcant amount of time in school, a great amount of learning happens
at home as well. Families can be an extremely valuable asset in supporting student academics at
home. Families can: 
help students with homework  
encourage students to value education 
help students keep track of work 
provide their perspective on the material students learn 
create consistent expectations across the home and school environments  
This helps support student success and can improve academic outcomes, such as grades and test
scores. Academics can also be supported through strong family-teacher relationships—when
teachers have strong communication with families, everyone is on the same page. 
Reduce Behavioral Concerns –
Engaging families helps with behavior management by creating consistent expectations across
home and school environments. When students have rules that align at home and at school, they
are more easily able to meet the expectations of both.   
Increase Student Involvement in Extracurriculars –
Family engagement with the school can also encourage students to participate in extracurricular
activities: when families are in communication with schools, they are more aware of what
opportunities are available and more likely to encourage their children to participate.  
In addition to this wide evidence supporting the effectiveness of school-family-community
partnerships, legal requirements also support family and community engagement. Let’s look at
those now.


Legal Considerations
Two main pieces of legislation impact school and family partnerships: the Individuals with
Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA) and the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Both laws aim
to support students, and both involve requirements for family engagement.

EVERY STUDENT SUCCEEDS ACT (ESSA)
The Every Student Succeeds Act is a wide-reaching piece of legislation that impacts schools in
many ways. This piece of legislation was enacted in 2015 with the goal of increasing equal access
to quality education for all students in the United States. As part of this goal, guidelines are
provided for how to best engage families and parents.  
Highlights from the requirements outlined by this act include:  
- providing information for parents about the content covered in school, assessments, and
student progress 
- providing materials and training to help parents help their children 
- providing education to educators on how to best partner with families 
- coordinating with other programs, such as pre-school and parent resource centers 
- having communication that is understandable to families (translated in multiple languages
as needed) 
The act also includes suggested practices, such as:  
- using family feedback for school professional development activities 
- providing literacy training to parents and families 
- using funds for potential family expenses, such as transportation or childcare 
- encouraging families to connect with each other to support one another’s involvement 
- having ﬂexibility in meeting with families: having ﬂexible times and locations that may be
outside of the school 
- establishing district-wide family councils 
- partnering with community-based organizations and businesses 
There is much more to ESSA in addition to the practices listed above. Be sure to check with your
school administrators and leadership to see how your unique school meets the requirements of
this act.  


INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES IN EDUCATION ACT (IDEA)
The Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA) is another wide-reaching piece of
legislation that supports students with a diagnosed disability, such as ADHD, autism, blindness,
deafness, and many others (for a full listing, see our “Cultural Humility” lesson). This act also
includes requirements for family involvement in the process of developing Individualized
Education Plans (IEPs) for students. This is especially relevant for family engagement at the Tier 3
level for students receiving interventions. Some highlights from this act include:  
- requiring families to be in attendance at IEP meetings at an agreed-on time and place 
- requiring schools to reach out to parents in advance 
- requiring translators for families who are deaf or speak other languages 
While these guidelines are speciﬁc to students with IEPs, they are also best practices for other
students in the school as well: some of these guidelines, like requiring translators, are similar to
what is mentioned in ESSA.  

Before we move onto more practical ways we can support school-family-community
partnerships, let’s apply what you’ve learned so far about the importance of family-school
partnerships speciﬁcally.



How to Support School-Family-Community Partnerships
Utilizing the Dual Capacity-Building Framework to Overcome
Challenges and Meet Goals
Trying to create a roadmap on your own, without help, to a place you haven't been before would
be overwhelming and potentially frightening. The good news is that you’re not searching for
how to do this on your own! Aside from working as a team within your school, you have tools to
guide you. One of the key tools that will aid you in practically building school-family-community
partnerships is the Dual Capacity-Building Framework. 

Dual Capacity-Building Framework
The Dual Capacity-Building Framework is an evidence-based set of recommendations for
promoting family engagement. The goal of this framework is to increase effective engagement
by addressing the many challenges or barriers to engagement that families and educators may
face through developing relationships and building the capacity of both groups. 
As shown in the graphic below, there are several components to the Dual Capacity-Building
Framework.  Click on the graphic to enlarge it. 
Graphic depiction of the Dual Capacity Building Framework
That image can look overwhelming; don’t worry. We’re about to break it down! To start, there
are four main components of the Dual Capacity-Building Framework: 
1 The Challenge
2 Essential Conditions
3 Policy and Program Goals
4 Capacity Outcomes
Let's unpack each of these items in more detail.

Component 1: The Challenge
The Challenge component of the Dual Capacity-Building Framework focuses on some of the
diffculties that both educators and families may face in trying to connect. The theory suggests
that while educators and parents both acknowledge the importance of family-school-
community partnerships, and both want to support children's academic success, various
obstacles can interfere with this goal.  
On the educator side, some of these challenges include:  
- Lack of training or guidelines for how to intentionally build positive relationships with families  
- Lack of time or other resources 
- Cultural differences
- Language barriers
- Lack of administrative support
- Negative past experiences, stereotypes, or deﬁcit mindsets about community members
On the family side, challenges may include: 
- Cultural differences and/or language barriers  
- Negative previous experiences, such as feeling unwelcomed, judged, or dismissed  
- Limited time and competing priorities
- Transportation or childcare needs  
As you may have noticed, educators and families may face similar challenges, such as: cultural
or linguistic differences, time pressure and other commitments, negative previous interactions,
or stereotypes about each other. Notably, educators and families don't lack the desire or effort to
connect, and they can overcome barriers by intentionally working together. The remainder of
the Dual Capacity-Building Framework addresses these challenges and empowers educators
and communities to work together.

Component 2: Essential Conditions
Essential conditions are in place to help us respond to the challenges of family engagement and
are needed to successfully develop partnerships. They can be divided into two categories:
process and organizational.  
Process conditions relate to steps or action items that are taken to support the building of
partnerships. Click through the ﬂashcards to learn more. 
1 of 5
Linked to learning: School-family-community partnerships should be linked to the learning that students do in the classroom. This shows families the expectations for their children and helps connect back to the goal of supporting children academically. An example of being linked to learning is providing families with handouts that provide extra information on what the student learned in class, as well as pointers and resources the family can use to help students with homework. 
2 of 5
Relational: To build effective partnerships, there needs to be strong relationships between families and schools built on trust and respect. This takes time and consistency. You can start with emails or phone calls introducing yourself as an educator or staff member, or work with your school administration to draft an introduction as a school! Key ways to build trust include responding to families or community partners within a set timeframe, asking open-ended questions, and seeking input on matters relevant to them.   
3 of 5
Developmental: Effective partnerships have the development of the community in mind; they seek to empower equal partnerships. This involves using a growth mindset: partnerships can always continue evolving and improving over time. For example, you may want to start with student volunteers or asking for school supply donations instead of jumping directly to a community partner sponsored event. This allows for relationship building and resource scaling!  
4 of 5
Collaborative: Partnerships should seek to truly involve all parties in collaborative and collective problem-solving. This is where two-way communication is needed to ensure that you are working with families. Examples of collaboration include having families on councils, collecting surveys regarding families’ experiences within the school, and seeking their input on schoolwide expectations. 
5 of 5
Interactive
These partnerships go beyond information dissemination or one-way communication and give partners the opportunity to actively engage. Some ways that partners can engage include: providing and receiving feedback, practicing skills, applying what has been learned, and participating in dialogues and discussions. 

Organizational conditions refer to conditions that must be met from an organizational
perspective, including the leadership teams for schools and districts. The organizational
conditions that must be met are reviewed in depth in the ﬂashcards below! 
1 of 3
Systemic: School-family-community partnerships are not random acts done at any time. They are systemic, ingrained in the school system, and considered an essential aspect of education. For example, the effort for starting or sustaining partnerships does not rest on a handful of educators who are interested but is instead explicitly supported by administration and planned for. 
2 of 3
Integrated: Policies and practices promoting school-family-partnerships are
considered within the full context of the school and are integrated into systems already in place. An
example of integration looks like including family members in school councils that are already running.
3 of 3
Sustained: Partnerships carried out consistently using the resources of the school and district over long periods of time rather than sporadically. Partnerships are planned for, part of the school culture, and able to last. This can look like bidirectional communication with families through weekly emails or phone calls instead of solely relying on end of term reviews or reaching out when there is an issue. 
Now that we’ve reviewed the conditions necessary to overcome the challenges, let’s look at the
next phase in the Dual Capacity-Building Framework: goals!


Component 3: Policy and Program Goals
Policy and program goals are unique to each school and district, but can be divided into four
categories: capabilities, connections, conﬁdence, and cognition. Use the tabs below to learn
more about each of those categories!

Capabilities: Human capital, skills, and knowledge –
These are goals focused on empowering families and educators to work together. For educators,
this could include building skills in cultural competence and humility, training in family
engagement, and any other resources needed to enable them to engage. For families, this can
include access to knowledge about student academics in the school, information about how to
navigate the school system, and other support or advocacy. 

Connections: Important relationships and networks, social capital –
Successful partnerships involve networks of relationships and social connections to enable
families to have the social capital to engage effectively.  Goals here can look like policies
regarding how often families are to be contacted and when, and distinct periods of seeking input
from families or community partners on how to better serve them and connect. 

Confidence: Individual level of self-efffcacy –
It is important for educators and communities to have conﬁdence and comfort in engaging with
each other. This means that educators have the resources needed to engage successfully, and
families are welcomed and shown that they are valued. 
Practically, this can look like setting aside rooms or times (e.g., every other Friday; Wednesdays
at 3:45 PM) for family engagement so that educators know that their administration supports
their family engagement efforts. Another example is ensuring that translators are available at the
school so that families who speak another primary language have the conﬁdence to engage with
the school instead of feeling intimidated by the language barrier. 

Cognition: Assumptions, beliefs, and worldview –
Assumptions, beliefs, and worldviews inﬂuence the attitudes and willingness of educators,
families, and the community to engage with each other. When educators, families, and
communities feel valued, believe in the importance of collaborating, and are committed, they are
able to build strong relationships. Providing continuing education opportunities for educators to
learn more about the value of family engagement or committing to restorative practices between
families and educators or staff who’ve experienced brokenness in their partnership are practical
examples of goals related to cognition. 
Once policy and program goals are in place, capacity outcomes can be reviewed!


Component 4: Capacity Outcomes
Capacity outcomes are the desired results of the policy and program goals. Ultimately, the main
outcome is an effective partnership that supports student and academic success. There are also
goals within this for both educators and families. For educators, some goals might be to:  
- View families and communities with understanding and strengths-based lens  
- Create a school/district culture that is open, accepting, and welcoming to families  
- Connect family/community involvement with student learning  
For families, some goals might be: 
- Support student learning and development
- Help monitor student time, behavior, and resources
- Encourage positive self-image and growth mindset for children
- Act as role models for students
- Collaborate with schools: act as leaders and/or advocates for children 
These are the four components of the Dual Capacity-Building Framework, but that’s not all
there is to it! The Dual Capacity-Building Framework also provides suggested strategies to
increase engagement.  
Let’s take a closer look at two of the suggested strategies: parent-teacher home visits and
academic parent-teacher teams.     


Parent-Teacher Home Visits
Parent-teacher home visits are one tool for increasing engagement recommended by the Dual
Capacity-Building Framework. This strategy involves educators visiting the homes of students
in their school to get to know the students' community and environment. These visits can
happen over the summer or at the beginning of the school year and can be an initial point of
contact for parents and teachers.
The purpose of this visit is not to report any problems, address any concerns, or suggest
anything. The visit is conducted to get to know the families and communities in the school
better and develop a trusting relationship. It is important to communicate to families that these
visits are purely about building relationships—some families may assume that this visit is due to
a concern that the school may have or feel like they are being investigated. Making it clear that
this is just to build a relationship is key for building trust and buy-in.  
From a parent’s perspective, hear how these visits can be helpful: 
“To make a long story short, that home
visit was the best visit of my life. Now, the
teacher and I are so connected. I really
appreciate these home visits; when I was
coming up we received home visits, but
they were for CPS or they were for
attendance issues. Home visits were for a
lot of negative issues and so there are a lot
of negative connotations around the idea
of home visits. I’m glad that is changing.”
- Ellen Little, Parent

Academic Parent Teacher Teams
Another tool is academic parent-teacher teams (APTT), a model of parent engagement
developed by Dr. Maria Paredes. These are based on parent-teacher conferences but involve a
group of parents meeting with a teacher to discuss the activities and curriculum going on in
class.  
The goal of these meetings is to provide families with a network so they can interact with each
other and increase their conﬁdence about engagement. This is achieved through three 75-
minute group meetings and one 30-minute individual meeting with parents each school year.  
This can also be a powerful tool for engagement, as evidenced by the following quote from an
educator describing their experience:
“Parents meet up to the expectations that teachers have for
parents, and then teachers meet up to the expectations that
parents have for teachers. I know what the parent wants for
their child, and they know what I want from their child and
from them. I do my part, they do their part, and then the
child does their part. We become the team.”
- Sheryl Garner, Teacher
These aren’t the only possibilities for increasing engagement. Look at the table below for a
variety of different ideas, organized by its level of impact (i.e., low, moderate, high) adapted from
the Michigan Department of Education (2020). 

TABLE HERE
Chart displaying low, moderate, and high-impact activities for engagement
Once plans for increasing the strength of school-family-community partnerships are in place,
you don’t have to sit around and wonder or guess how effective those plans are! There are ways
to assess the effectiveness of the partnerships more objectively. You’ll learn more about that
next, after a knowledge check!




Assessing School-Family-Community Partnerships
Checking the Pulse on Partnerships  
You don't set off with the roadmap and your travel companions and never check in with either
again. You periodically check the roadmap and ask your company how they're doing and what
they need! Once school-family-community partnerships are in place, the next step is to
determine their effectiveness and if goals are being met.  To do this, there are many available
resources. Let’s review some of those now! 
PBIS Assessments
While this resource is provided by the national center for PBIS, it can also be used in any school
that involves school-family-community partnerships. This assessment measures: 
- Connections
- Shared Decision Making
- Expectations
- Discipline Systems
- Satisfaction
- Your Perspectives
Surveys like these can be integral in producing data that can inform decisions. They provide
families and educators conﬁdential or anonymous ways to express their needs and can function
as an objective accountability measure. 

PBISApps
PBISApps empower educators to make data-driven decisions in real time for
the best student outcomes. The SWIS Suite: Powerhouse reports for schools.
PBIS Assessment: Measure effectiveness and school climate for free. PBIS
Evaluation: Reports for districts, regions & states.

Measures of Partnerships
Another tool for measuring the strength of your partnerships comes from the Wisconsin
Department of Public Instruction. This rubric-style assessment includes questions about
parenting and family skills, communicating, learning at home, volunteering, decision making,
and collaborating with the community. This may sound familiar—this rubric is based on the
same six activities of parental involvement discussed in the beginning of this lesson!   

Flamboyan Center 
This rubric was designed by the Flamboyan Center and rooted in research. It provides an in-
depth list of objectives for family and school engagement. There are three main components to
this rubric: a welcoming and engaged culture, supporting student achievement, and investing
families and community partners in student success. Each of these areas have more objectives,
as you can see in the rubric!  

FACE Rubric
This is another rubric designed to assess implementation of school-family-community
partnerships in an MTSS framework. The rubric is broken down and scored in six major
components:  
- Leadership
- Data-informed Goals and Outcomes
- Multidimensional/multi-tiered Approach
- Empowering Families
- Collaborative Problem-solving
This rubric also provides in-depth examples for the various levels of proﬁciency in each of
these components. This rubric can be used to assess your school, as well as to review what
higher levels of proﬁciency at each level might look like.   

Looking at these rubrics or assessments can feel intimidating, especially if school-family-
community partnerships are a new area of focus in your school. Remember, these rubrics
and assessments are goalposts to strive for, not to expect from the beginning! Give
yourself and your school grace as your work towards those. It’s progress, not perfection. 

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- Schools, families, and communities have the common goal of supporting children's
academic success and can make strong teams to help meet this goal
- Family engagement in the school setting is supported by research and policy
recommendations
- There are many systems for implementing family engagement, including the Dual
Capacity-Building Framework
- MTSS provides a structure for enacting family engagement across tiered levels of
support
- Assessments can help you and your school determine areas of strengths and needs
to support effective engagement with families and communities
Cultural Competence in the School Setting



@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Cultural Competence in the School Setting
Outcomes:
1. Comprehend the importance of creating an inclusive school community by valuing and
respecting diverse identities 
2. Differentiate between cultural competence, cultural humility, and cultural
responsiveness 
3. Recognize disproportionality and its negative impact within the school setting
4. Gain the skills to address equity issues, prevent misidentiﬁcation in special education,
and reduce discipline disparities effectively
5. Utilize components of multi-tiered systems for supporting equitable outcomes

The School Setting
A Rich Tapestry
As Maya Angelou, acclaimed author and poet, described, in the school setting, individuals'
identities are complex and made of many components. The school setting comprises a diverse
range of individuals, encompassing students, teachers, administrators, and staff members who
all are part of the school community.  
Students, the heart and soul of any school, represent a rich tapestry of individuals with different
backgrounds, interests, and aspirations. They vary in age, hailing from different stages of their
educational journey, each with their own set of needs and developmental milestones. Whether
they are young learners embarking on their ﬁrst steps into formal education or seasoned
adolescents preparing for the challenges of higher education, students contribute to the vibrant
mix of personalities within the school community. 
Teachers, as the guiding force in the educational process, bring their expertise, passion, and
dedication to the school setting. They come from diverse racial, ethnic, and cultural
backgrounds, reﬂecting the broader mosaic of society. With their distinct teaching styles,
pedagogical approaches, and subject matter expertise, teachers play a crucial role in shaping
learning experiences and fostering an inclusive environment for students. 
Administrators provide the essential framework and support that enables the school to function
effectively. Their roles encompass a wide range of responsibilities, from managing resources
and coordinating programs to establishing policies and promoting a positive school culture.
Like other members of the school community, administrators contribute their unique identities
and experiences, inﬂuencing decision-making processes and fostering an environment
conducive to growth and learning. 
The dedicated staff members behind the scenes play an integral part in maintaining the smooth
operation of the school. From custodial staff ensuring a clean and safe environment to cafeteria
workers providing nourishment to students, these individuals contribute their skills and
expertise to the overall wellbeing of the school community. They too have their own diverse
identities, adding to the richness and inclusivity of the school environment. 
Overall, in the school setting, individual’s identities are complex and made of many
components, including:
age
race 
ethnicity 
gender
religious beliefs
political beliefs
primary language 
ability or disability status
...and many more. Identities are important because they shape our experiences, perspectives,
and values. When these experiences and perspectives are valued and respected, everyone is able
to feel welcomed and contribute to the school community.  
We all should know that diversity makes for a rich
tapestry, and we must understand that all the threads of
the tapestry are equal in value no matter what their color.
Maya Angelou
Another important component to acknowledge about identity is the concept of intersectionality.
This term, coined by Kimberlé Crenshaw, refers to multiple, overlapping identities and the
impact of this overlap on someone's experiences. For example, a person may be Hispanic and a
Christian. Together, these two identities impact the person's perspective and experience as they
interact with each other, making an identity that is different from someone who is Hispanic and
a different religion, or Christian and a different ethnicity.  
When thinking about identities, it is important to recognize that having a multitude of identities
is a strength to have in the community and in schools. For student and school success, it is
essential to have an environment that is open and accepting to all. Beyond the mere presence of
different identities existing in a community, everyone's full participation being expected,
equally welcomed, and valued creates a strong and successful environment. 
Research shows that communities with many identities are more innovative, have better
educational outcomes, and show stronger critical thinking skills (Offce of Planning,
Evaluation, and Policy Development Offce of the Under Secretary U.S. Department of Education
November 2016).  
When differences in schools are respected and valued, strong and supportive communities are
cultivated. 
Given the great number of different identities in the school setting, it is important to
intentionally ensure that all identities feel supported and welcomed. Cultural competence,
humility, and responsiveness help to achieve this goal.


Cultural Competence, Humility, and Responsiveness
Fostering Inclusive Practices
Understanding the differences between cultural competence, humility, and responsiveness is
essential for creating a truly inclusive and supportive school community. Each of these
principles brings a unique perspective and set of skills that contribute to building positive
relationships, promoting understanding, and valuing diversity. By recognizing these
distinctions, educators and individuals within the school setting can effectively navigate the
complexities of identities, address biases and stereotypes, and cultivate an environment where
every individual feels respected, valued, and able to fully participate. Therefore, gaining insights
into the nuances of cultural competence, humility, and responsiveness is vital to foster an
inclusive and equitable educational experience for all.

CULTURAL COMPETENCE
Cultural competence is a broad concept that aims to increase a person’s ability to interact
effectively with people of various backgrounds. Cultural competence is important in any ﬁeld and
can be used as a tool to improve outcomes in a school setting as well.     
Cultural competence implies a level of proﬁciency at which a person no longer needs to continue
learning, and it assumes that one can be competent in a culture in the same way that one may be
proﬁcient in a foreign language or driving a car. However, there are some limitations to cultural
competence. For example, the reality of working with people from diverse backgrounds is that
the lines between ‘competent’ and ‘incompetent’ may not be so clear or straightforward. Another
concern with the phrase cultural competence is that competent can imply that the person or
professional is an ‘expert’ on the culture of others, which could be inaccurate. As diversity
continues to grow and cultures continue to change, knowledge continues to need to be adjusted.  

CULTURAL HUMILITY
Cultural humility responds to the concerns of cultural competence by modifying the idea of
competence to humility. Cultural humility involves fostering an open-mindedness to cultures,
with an awareness of your own background and how it inﬂuences your perspective. Cultural
humility is more ﬂexible and implies an ongoing process of learning and considering new
viewpoints from other people, without a belief that any culture may be superior or inferior.

CULTURAL RESPONSIVENESS
Cultural responsiveness is one of the key components of Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS)
and involves adapting practices to meet the cultural needs of people being served. In the school
setting, staff and teachers use culturally responsive practices when they “strive to learn and value
their students’ culture as situated within historical and current sociopolitical contexts to inform
their instruction, scaffold student learning, and sustain students’ culture” (Ladson-Billings,
2014).  This means that culturally responsive education considers students' backgrounds,
understanding that this inﬂuences their perspective and their needs in the school setting. All
students need to be valued, respected, and understood to be successful, and cultural
responsiveness helps to achieve this goal. 
There are many ways to include culturally responsive practices in the school setting. An article by
Kressler, et al (2019) recommends four components of culturally responsive problem-solving to
consider: 
- use data-informed decision making — consider both qualitative and quantitative data when
making decisions
- adapt interventions to cultural needs or consider alternative interventions 
- look for disconnects between student and school cultures  
- examine assessments to ensure they are culturally appropriate 
Again, equity and inclusion are central to cultural responsiveness. What works best for a student
with one background may not be the best for another, and it is important to value and respect
these differences in practice.

Equity and Disproportionality in the School Setting
Breaking Down the Imbalance
With the values of cultural competence, humility, and responsiveness in mind, let’s look at
some of the challenges they can help address. Let’s begin with an understanding of some
essential concepts: equity and disproportionality.

Equity
Equity is an important issue that can be addressed with cultural competence, humility, and
responsiveness. One way to deﬁne equity comes from the Council of Chief State School Offcers
(CCSSO,2021), which states that equity is when: “every student has access to the educational
resources and rigor they need at the right moment in their education across race, gender,
ethnicity, language, disability, sexual orientation, family background and/or family income”
(p.3).   
At its core, this means that equity is providing students with unique supports based on their
individual needs. Importantly, equity must be distinguished from equality, which provides
everyone with the same supports. To illustrate the difference, examine the pictures below:
	In these images adapted from Shel Silverstein's "The Giving Tree" (1964), you can see that
there is a marked difference between “equality” and “equity.” In the image for equality, both
children are given the same ladder, but one side of the tree is higher than the other. In this
scenario, one of the children still cannot reach the fruit. In the picture depicting equity, this
child is given a taller ladder so that they can reach the fruit as effectively as the other child.  
Issues of equity compared to equality can also exist in the school environment. Education is not
always a level playing ﬁeld; student backgrounds and identities are all different, yet the
curriculum is generally the same for everyone. This can create challenges for students. 
For example, let's consider a history teacher who is administering an exam. One student in this
class may have been diagnosed with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). In a
classroom emphasizing equality, all students would take the same test under the same time
constraints and in the same location. For a student with ADHD, this may result in too many
distractions or a time frame that isn’t long enough to complete the test, which may negatively
impact their performance. In an equitable classroom, the student may have the option to take
the exam with extended time, or in an environment with fewer distractions, in order to level the
playing ﬁeld.   
To illustrate, Kimberlé Crenshaw, lawyer, and civil rights advocate, highlights the importance of
recognizing and addressing the unique needs and circumstances of individual students, such as
providing accommodations or adjustments that promote equity in the learning environment in
the quote below.
Treating different things the same can generate as much
inequality as treating the same things differently. 
Kimberlé Crenshaw
Therefore, it is crucial to strive for equitable practices that acknowledge and respond to the
diverse needs and experiences of students, fostering an inclusive and supportive educational
environment.

Deﬁning Disproportionality
While equity is ideal in the school setting, it may be diffcult to achieve. When equity is not
achieved, this is called disproportionality. Disproportionality is a difference in outcomes based
on certain factors. In a school setting, “having signiﬁcant disproportionality means that
students of a particular race/ethnicity are signiﬁcantly more likely than their other-race peers
to be identiﬁed as students with disabilities, identiﬁed in a particular disability category, placed
in a particular educational setting, or suspended/expelled as a disciplinary measure.” (National
Center for Learning Disabilities, 2020). In this lesson, you will examine two key components of
disproportionality in the school setting: 
1. Special Education Identiﬁcation
2. Discipline Disparities
Let’s examine each component!

Special Education Identiﬁcation
The identiﬁcation of students for special education is a complex process that involves assessing
various aspects of a student's needs, abilities, and learning challenges. However, this process
can be inﬂuenced by certain factors that result in disproportionality, where certain groups of
students are overrepresented or underrepresented in special education programs compared to
their representation in the overall student population. 
Disproportionality in special education identiﬁcation has been a longstanding concern,
particularly when it relates to subjective diagnoses. It highlights the need for cultural
competence and humility within the assessment and placement process. When cultural
competence and humility are not effectively incorporated into the special education
identiﬁcation process, there is a risk of biases and stereotypes inﬂuencing decision-making.
This can result in the misidentiﬁcation or under identiﬁcation of students from culturally
diverse backgrounds, leading to disparities in access to appropriate educational support. It is
crucial for educators and professionals involved in special education to be aware of these
potential pitfalls and strive to approach the identiﬁcation process with sensitivity, fairness, and
an understanding of the intersecting identities and experiences of students. 
By promoting cultural competence and humility in special education, professionals can enhance
their ability to accurately identify students' needs, provide targeted support, and reduce
disparities. Emphasizing the importance of understanding cultural nuances and recognizing the
potential for bias and disproportionality contributes to fostering an inclusive and equitable
educational environment, where every student's unique strengths and challenges are
acknowledged and addressed. 
Click through the items on the graphic below to explore
some qualifying diagnoses covered under IDEA:
Speciffc learning disability:
Specific learning disability is a broad category that includes disorders affecting a child's ability to read,
write, or do math, such as dyslexia, dysgraphia, or dyscalculia.
Other health impairment:
Other health impairments include various disorders that can impact a child's ability to learn, such as
ADHD. 
Autism spectrum disorder:
Autism spectrum disorder is a wide spectrum of developmental disability that can look different in each
child diagnosed with it, but it generally impacts social skills and behavior. 
Emotional disturbance:
Emotional disturbance can refer to various disorders impacting mood, such as anxiety or depression.
Speech or language impairment:
Speech or language impairments are any disabilities that impact a child's ability to talk or understand
language, such as speech sound disorder, articulation disorder, or receptive language disorder.
Visual impairment:
Visual impairments involve problems with vision that impact academic performance, such as blindness or
partial blindness (note: this doesn't include visual problems that can be corrected with glasses, such as
astigmatism or near-sightedness).
Blind-deafness:
This category describes children who meet the diagnosis of blindness and deafness.
Deafness:
This category fits children who have been diagnosed with deafness. Usually, this diagnosis is made by a
pediatrician or other medical professional.
Hearing impairment:
Hearing impairment applies to children who have hearing difficulties other than deafness.
Orthopedic impairment:
Orthopedic impairment is a disability relating to movement. Some examples include cerebral palsy, spina
bifida, muscular dystrophy, or multiple sclerosis.
Intellectual disability:
Intellectual disability involves difficulty learning and processing information, difficulties with social
interactions or abstract thought, delayed development, or difficulties with self-care activities. Intellectual
disability can be related to many disorders, such as Down syndrome, and can range from mild to severe.
Traumatic brain injury:
Traumatic brain injury results from especially damaging injuries to the brain and skull, such as those from
a car accident. These injuries can impact cognition, concentration, or development. The severity of
traumatic brain injury can vary and result in different impacts. 
Multiple disabilities:
Students can also be impacted by multiple disabilities at the same time. For example, a student might be
diagnosed with ADHD and depression. These two disabilities together may need unique support compared
to each one individually.

When considering referring students to special education, use the student's context to view
them holistically. There are many potential explanations for a student's diffculties or
challenges in the classroom, and these may or may not be related to the disability categories
described above. Because of possible alternative explanations, it is always crucial to consider
what may be causing a student's diffculties in the classroom when considering special
education services. While many students do need access to special education, it may not be the
right ﬁt for other students. Misidentiﬁcation can result in:   
- Not providing the right supports or addressing the true root of the issue
- Students missing opportunities for exposure to rigorous curriculum
- Inappropriate lowering of expectations for the student because of the stigma of a
special education label
- Lowering of self-esteem for students
- Increasing racial disparities when students of marginalized races are more often
misidentiﬁed
When students are identiﬁed for special education, it can also inﬂuence the likelihood that they
will be placed in more restrictive settings, with discrepancies between students with special
needs being placed in self-contained classrooms and being integrated into general education
classrooms (National Center for Learning Disabilities, 2020). This is a problem because
research supports the inclusion of students with special needs in general education classrooms:
it improves academic outcomes, provides socialization opportunities, provides all students the
opportunity to access challenging material, and increases the diversity of the classroom.   
When considering special education identiﬁcation and placement, it is important to remember
our key value of equity: providing students with the support that meets their individual needs.
Special education services are extremely valuable and can help level the playing ﬁeld for
students who are correctly identiﬁed; however, it can also be damaging to students who are
misidentiﬁed. 

Discipline Disparities
It is also essential to address the issue of discipline disparities in order to promote a fair and
inclusive educational environment. There are also signiﬁcant disproportionalities in student
discipline, particularly for exclusionary discipline.  
Exclusionary discipline refers to any discipline that removes students from the classroom, such
as suspensions or expulsions. This type of discipline is susceptible to disproportionality,
particularly for students with disabilities or from marginalized races.
When assessing the use of exclusionary discipline practices, it is important to note that these
practices: 
- Are unlikely to improve behavior
- Do not teach replacement behaviors; instead of teaching students what to do, it
- only teaches what not to do
- Increase the likelihood of students being held back or dropping out
- Lead to missed instructional time for students
- Lead to a student's perceptions of not belonging in the school system
- Increase the likelihood of students entering the juvenile justice system
Despite these issues in the use of exclusionary discipline, it is still an extremely common
practice. By the time of high school graduation, 1 in 3 students will have been suspended or
expelled.  
Nationwide data reﬂects trends of disproportionality in the use of exclusionary discipline
practices. Data collected by the United States Department of Education highlights discrepancies
by gender, race, and disability status. 
To review the data in detail, select the links below.    
Nationwide Disproportionality Across Race and Gender
This infographic provides information on nationwide trends in disproportionalities for suspensions and
expulsions across race and gender.
CLICK HERE
Nationwide Disproportionality for Students with Disabilities
This infographic shows national trends for disproportionality for students with disabilities and the
intersections of race and gender.
CLICK HERE
A review of the nationwide data provided by the U.S. Department of Education's Offce for Civil
Rights illustrates:
Stark contrasts for gender: 
While boys make up 51.4% of student enrollment, they make up 69.5% of in-school
suspensions, 70.5% of out-of-school suspensions, and 72.7% of expulsions.  
Imbalances in race, particularly for African American students:  
While African American boys make up 7.7% of enrollment, they make up 20.1% of in-
school suspensions, 25% of out-of-school suspensions, and 26% of expulsions: this is
more than triple their enrollment percentage. There is a similar disproportionality for
African American girls; while African American girls make up 7.4% of enrollment, they
make up 11.2% of in-school suspensions, 13.3% of out-of-school suspensions, and 11.8%
of expulsions.  
Staggering data for children with disabilities:
While students with disabilities comprise 15.9% of the student population, they account
for 28% of out-of-school suspensions.  
African American students make up 17.7% of students receiving disability supports, but
35.7% of out-of-school suspensions. This shows evidence of intersectionality: the two
identities of race and disability status together can inﬂuence students' educational
outcomes. 

Reﬂection
Now that you have reviewed some disproportionality data, consider the
following questions: 
- Did any of the data surprise you? Why or why not?
- How do you think your school compares to the nationwide data?
- Does your MTSS team have plans for responding to disproportionality if
 it is indicated in the data?
Implementing data-driven decision making is one of the ﬁrst steps districts and schools can
take to address disproportionality and create a more equitable and inclusive learning
environment for all students. School districts can: 
- Regularly collect and analyze data related to student outcomes, discipline, and
 access to educational opportunities. 
- Identify patterns of disproportionality and use the data to inform targeted
 interventions and support systems. 
- Monitor progress and make adjustments to strategies based on ongoing data
 analysis.
For more information on using data to identify and
address disproportionality within your district or school
team, download and review the Center for PBIS Guide
below. 



How Does MTSS Help Support Cultural Competence?
Exploring the Role of MTSS in Supporting Equitable and Inclusive Practices
There are several reasons why MTSS is a good tool for intentionally addressing potential bias or
disproportionality in the school setting.
- Emphasis on culturally responsive assessments and interventions  
- Promotion of proactive, preventive, early intervention  
- Reliance on data-informed decision making 
- Emphasis on high-quality and evidence-based practices
- Team-based decision making and strong leadership
- Professional development for addressing biases and use of evidence-based
 culturally responsive practice

Cultural Responsiveness in MTSS
Earlier, you learned about cultural responsiveness and how it can be used to support positive
outcomes for all students. One multi-tiered system speciﬁc to behavior is Positive Behavior
Interventions and Supports (PBIS) as outlined in the “All Hands on Deck” course. There are
several components to successfully implementing culturally responsive PBIS (Leverson, et al.,
2021). While these are presented as characteristics of PBIS, they are relevant features of any
well-functioning MTSS.
Click through the following tabs to review key features.

IDENTITY
To promote effective interactions and understanding, it is crucial for practitioners in the school
setting, such as teachers, administrators, and mental health clinicians, to recognize their own
identities and perspectives. Similarly, students' identities encompass various aspects, including
race, ethnicity, ability status, religion, language, and more, which should be understood beyond
categorization. It is important to separately identify the unique identities of students' families.
Considering the broader community's identities, beliefs, values, and the school's relationship with
it helps establish partnerships and comprehend students' backgrounds. This understanding
enables schools to foster connections with community organizations and acknowledge the
contextual factors inﬂuencing students' experiences. 

VOICE
Giving all community members involved in the school a voice is important to ensure that all
perspectives are considered and valued. Diversity exists in communities, so it is important to
make sure that all voices are included. As stated by EdWeek.org (2018), "Education is strongest
when diverse perspectives and voices are shared and heard in settings of learning and
development. In the classroom and the surrounding community, a rich educational opportunity is
available to those who are able to create an environment in which varying ideas and insights built
on broad backgrounds can make themselves known." By embracing and amplifying diverse
voices, schools can create an environment that fosters a robust educational experience and
embraces the wealth of perspectives within the community.
Voices can be included in activities like the school Parent Teacher Association (PTA) or volunteer
events, where families can engage with the school in leadership roles. It is also important to
consider two-way communication: schools do not just communicate with or ask families for
help, but, rather, families can also let schools know how to best support them.

SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT
A supportive environment is one of the foundations of successful MTSS. This means that there is a
system for creating a positive school culture. Positive school culture is neither punitive nor
restrictive at its foundation. An example of a supportive and positive environment is teaching
appropriate replacement behaviors when problem behaviors arise in students, rather than simply
punishing the problem behavior. A supportive environment allows all students to feel welcomed
and promotes belonging. 

SITUATIONAL APPROPRIATENESS
Situational appropriateness refers to the mindset that different behaviors are needed in different
situations, and support of positive behavior involves teaching students which situations require
which behaviors. 
Some behaviors that are perceived as problematic by school staff may be the result of a cultural
mismatch between the school and the student.
To help with this issue, schools can assess the values and expectations of the community when
establishing school-wide behavior expectations. Then, they can adjust school policies to be in line
with these values or indicate clearly to students when the expectations of the school may differ
from their home environments.
Situational appropriateness helps foster inclusivity. When students and communities have their
values represented in the school setting, it shows that they are appreciated members of the
collective.
 
 
While MTSS provides structures that can help reduce disproportionality, individuals can also
take steps to reduce this issue. One way to do this is by measuring our own implicit bias and
build self-awareness through taking an Implicit Association Test (IAT).   
Use the link below to navigate to the "Project Implicit Health" (PIH) website where you will ﬁnd
15 IATs. Complete a test of your choice, then consider the questions in the next reﬂection
activity.
Implicit bias refers to the unconscious attitudes, stereotypes, or prejudices that affect our
perceptions, actions, and decisions without our conscious awareness. These biases are
deeply ingrained and can inffuence our judgments and behaviors towards certain
individuals or groups, often leading to unintended discrimination or unequal treatment. 

Implicit Bias Reﬂection
 Stones reﬂected in water 
After taking one of the Implicit Association Tests (IAT), reﬂect on the following questions: 
- Did your test results surprise you? Why or why not?
- How might the results of this test impact your interactions in the school setting?
- What action steps can you take moving forward based on the results of this test?
These reﬂection questions are designed to encourage self-awareness and deepen your
understanding of your own biases and attitudes. It is important to approach these questions
with an open mind and without judgment. Remember, there are no right or wrong answers
here. The goal is to gain insights into yourself in order to better understand and support your
students. Take your time to contemplate these questions and consider how you can apply your
newfound awareness to create a more inclusive and equitable learning environment. 
Now, let's further explore the topic of biases and
attitudes by watching a thought-provoking video
featuring diversity advocate Vernā Myers. In this video,
Myers delves into the realm of subconscious attitudes
and biases that one often unknowingly holds. 
Sorry: we can't play video on this browser. Please make sure it's up to date and
that Flash 11.1 or higher is installed. Load this talk on ted.com
The intention of the video was to offer valuable insights and spark deeper reﬂection on the
subconscious attitudes and biases one may possess. Remember, understanding and addressing
these biases is a continuous journey toward fostering a more inclusive and equitable school
environment.

Recommendations and Additional Resources for Equity and Inclusion in Education 
While MTSS practices can help address issues of disparities and inequities, it is imperative that
districts and schools intentionally attend to these issues via policies and procedures. Below are
policy recommendations that address disproportionality and other inequities and help create
school-community environments where all students thrive.

Speciffc Commitment to Equity –
A speciﬁc commitment to equity is a key recommendation for policies regarding
disproportionality. This commitment can be present in the mission statement of a school or
district, a separate statement in policies, or it can be in both. It is important to be clear and
