district, a separate statement in policies, or it can be in both. It is important to be clear and
speciﬁc about what is meant by equity in the school or district.   
Here is an example school statement showing a speciﬁc commitment to equity provided by the
PBIS Center (Green, et al., 2015):
“Example High School is committed to high expectations, varied and challenging experiences
relevant for each student, positive and proactive discipline practices, and educational equity for
all students. We are committed to identifying strengths and addressing improvements in the
operations of our school through the continuous use of data as an effort to honor each
component of our mission.”

Family Partnerships in Policy Development –
Including families is another way to promote equity through school policies. Having policies that
speciﬁcally encourage and facilitate the involvement of families ensures that cultural
perspectives are considered and valued.   
Here is an example family partnership policy statement (Green, et al., 2015):   
“One of our primary goals at Example School is to ensure that parents and community members
have opportunities to assist and support the educational process through participation in decision
making, school governance, and volunteer activities. It is our desire to include parents and
community members as an integral part of our students’ learning process. With that said,
Example School has jointly developed with parents, students, and staff a Parent/School Compact,
which outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will work together to ensure our
school maintains a welcoming and positive learning environment that promotes student
success.”

Focus on Implementing Positive, Proactive Behavior Support Practices –
A third way to support equity is to focus behavior management strategies on the prevention of
problem behaviors rather than intervention after the fact. Using this strategy, school staff set
clear, fair expectations and provide a school culture that encourages and teaches positive
behavior. 
Here is an example school procedure indicating this (Green, et al., 2015): 
“Example High School will maintain a positive environment by providing ongoing instruction
and reinforcement of appropriate social and behavior interactions within the school community.
As a school, behavior expectations will be systematically taught in classrooms and in the
common areas (e.g., cafeteria, gym, library) during the ﬁrst two weeks of school, and again in
January when students return from winter break. Throughout the school year, students will
receive positive reinforcement for displaying expected behaviors and reteaching of appropriate
behaviors when those expectations are not met.”

Clear, Objective Discipline Procedures –
To promote equity, schools must clearly deﬁne discipline procedures. 
As mentioned earlier, behavior can be subjective; a problem behavior in one environment may
not be considered a problem behavior in another, and cultural values not only inﬂuence behavior
but also how it is interpreted. To prevent these factors from contributing to inequities, clear
deﬁnitions of positive and negative behavior should be provided to teachers and students, as well
as what indicates a minor or major behavioral concern. 
Review this example to see these principles in action (Green, et al., 2015):  
“The teachers and administrators at Example School have procedures for identifying and
responding to behavior incidents in our building and review them formally on a regular basis. Our
orientation materials and school website include deﬁnitions for the most common problem
behaviors we see in our school, as well as examples of how these behaviors can range from
minor, staff-managed behaviors to major, offce-managed behaviors.” 

Removal or Reduction of Exclusionary Discipline Practices –
As discussed previously, exclusionary discipline practices can contribute to inequity because they
remove students from the classroom, further disrupting the student’s education and
contributing to feelings of exclusion from the school system. They are also frequently
disproportionately applied. To prevent the negative impact of exclusionary discipline practices,
schools can adopt policies that limit their use as much as possible.   
For example, a school could propose (Green et al., 2015):  
“For serious behavior incidents that do not require mandatory expulsion, Example Elementary
School’s multi-disciplinary team will determine appropriate interventions in lieu of out-of-
school suspension. Students who are involved in behavior incidents in this category are required
to participate in activities designed to support development of prosocial skills. See our Graduated
Discipline Policy for alternative responses.” 

Graduated Discipline Systems with Instructional Alternatives to Exclusion –
The next step in reducing exclusionary discipline is to provide alternatives. All problem behaviors
should be addressed, but not all behaviors warrant removal from the classroom environment.
 Deﬁning and categorizing behaviors based on level of severity assists with reduction of
exclusionary discipline.  A graduated system does this by classifying behavior events based on
their severity, leaving only the most severe for exclusionary discipline and responding to
relatively minor incidents through other options.
Here is a sample district policy supporting this concept:  
“Example District believes in the use of graduated discipline to ensure severe punishments, such
as exclusion from the learning environment, are reserved for credible threats to the safety of
others. The goal of all discipline responses is to ensure students understand the school’s behavior
expectations, repair the harm caused by their choice of behavior, and identify how to prevent the
problem in the future. When repeated or serious behavior incidents occur, each school’s
multidisciplinary team will conduct a functional behavior assessment for students to identify
needs for academic and behavior support.” 
When adopting this type of system, it is important to have alternatives to suspensions and
expulsions in mind. Here are a few options:  
- Restorative Justice: aims to repair any harm that is done because of a behavior. It
encourages students to self-reﬂect, empathize with those they may have harmed, and take
actions to restore the issue. An example of restorative justice may be having a student who
sprayed graffti on school property work with the custodial staff to remove it.  
- Mediation: this is another alternative to exclusionary discipline. This tool might be most
relevant for behaviors related to interpersonal conﬂicts or resulting in interpersonal harm.
This approach also encourages self-reﬂection and empathy for people who may have been
harmed as a result of a behavior.  
- Assess communication: examine communication patterns for miscommunications or
cultural mismatches between student and teacher expectations. 
- Provide redirection: redirect behavior through strategies such as a break, additional
activities, or other support.
- Teach appropriate behaviors: redeﬁne expectations as necessary, and provide positive
reinforcement for these behaviors.
- Conferences: use conferences to discuss problems with students, families, teachers, and/or
administrators.

Procedures with Accountability for Equitable Student Outcomes –
Equitable policies and procedures can also beneﬁt from providing accountability. This means that
there are clear standards and expectations in place for the policies listed above and data is used to
make decisions. Procedures with accountability:
-set goals
- outline the steps towards meeting those goals
- provide a roadmap for what is intended so that everyone knows roles and responsibilities
therein
The following is an example of procedures with clear accountability  (Green, et al., 2015):
“Goals: In alignment with our school’s mission and district equity policy, our school leadership
team’s current equity goals are: (1) provide at least two professional development opportunities
annually for teachers and administrators related to culturally responsive behavior support
practices, (2) increase the percentage of students who have positive perceptions of our school
climate to 80% across all racial/ethnic groups as measured by the annual District School Climate
Survey, (3) increase family and community involvement in school activities to 80%, (4) provide
at least one community activity/ﬁeld trip each semester, and (5) monitor disaggregated rates of
ODRs at least quarterly and reduce risk ratios to no more than 1.25 for any group.”  


Let's review the lesson.
- Cultural competence, humility, and responsiveness are key values to apply when
working in the school setting.
- Disproportionality is one issue that may arise in the school setting and often
involves disproportionate rates of exclusionary discipline and special education
identiﬁcation.
- Cultural responsiveness can help prevent disproportionality.
- When determining if disproportionality is present, it is important to use data-
informed decision making.




#####
*****
Building the Foundation with Tier 1- 1.1:
Universal Supports
Family & Student Engagement
Elevating Engagement in Practical Ways


@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 3: Universal Supports
Outcomes:
1. Contextualize the role and purpose of Tier 1 support within core principles of Multi-
tiered System of Supports
2. Understand the key concepts underlying Tier 1 infrastructure
3. Identify Tier 1 best practices

Tier 1 & Universal Supports,The Strong Foundation of All Supports
When skyscrapers are built, the ﬁrst step is to build a steady, fortiﬁed foundation. The
foundation of the structure is one of its most important components: everything that is built depends upon its stability and strength. The foundation supports everything else in the structure. All aspects of the building, from the ﬁrst to the top ﬂoor, begin with and depend on
the foundation. Tier 1 of the Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS) is the foundational level for building a
strong school community. Similar to constructing a skyscraper, a solid Tier 1 foundation offers
the essential support and stability on which every aspect of a resilient school community relies.
Having a shaky or unstable foundation can make building anything on top feel diffcult or
impossible. When a foundation is strong, building your structure can become easier and more effective—the possibilities become endless. The goal of this course is to review some of the key building blocks of Tier 1 so that your school has a solid foundation.
It’s important to note that while having a strong foundation from the start is helpful,
foundations also need to be monitored over time. Supporting Tier 1 is not a one-time endeavor,
but rather a process of building, addressing problems, and re-building over time as needed. Like
many components of MTSS, Tier 1 support is a continuous process. 
Essential to this process of building and maintaining a strong foundation is relationships:
relationships between students and educators, among educators, and among families and
communities all contribute to our ability to effectively work in Tier 1 and throughout MTSS. 


Key Principles of MTSS, A Foundational Review
MTSS is a framework approach for supporting student success in schools. MTSS includes three
levels of support: Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3. These tiers are differentiated based on the intensity of
support needed, allowing support to be individualized for each student depending on the
tier.MTSS aims to help all students at all times through these adaptive, continuous tiers. 
Now that you’ve reviewed the basics of the MTSS framework, click through the image below for
examples of supports that may exist at each level of the pyramid. If you’ve taken our All Hands
on Deck or Core MTSS course, these may look familiar to you!




IMAGE HERE

Tier 3:
Individualized Education Plans (IEPs)
Individual and family counseling/interventions

Tier 2
Check-in, Check-Out system (CICO)
Mentoring programs
Small group tutoring

Tier 1
Schoolwide expectations
Screening
Parent-teacher conferences
Schoolwide celebrations

MTSS is divided into tiers, but there are some practices that are central to MTSS as a whole. 

IMAGE HERE

1. School-Family-Community Partnerships
School-family-community partnerships involve families and communities working in partnerships with
schools. These partnerships help to ensure consistency across the home and school environment, increase
positive academic and behavioral outcomes for students, and build a strong community. Some examples
of school-family-community practices are parent-teacher home visits, parent IEP involvement, and
back-to-school nights.

2. Team-Based Leadership
Team-based leadership sets the stage for all levels of MTSS. Leadership teams, or MTSS teams, exist at
the district and school levels, and there may be multiple teams in each school depending on its needs.
Leadership teams work collaboratively to review data, make decisions about programming, and
implement changes as needed. 

3. Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment
Resource mapping and needs assessments are two related practices that help schools identify the needs
present in a school and the resources available to help meet those needs. This helps schools use resources
effectively to meet the needs of all students. 

4. Tiered Delivery System
The tiered delivery system underlies all aspects of MTSS. One of the benefits of a tiered delivery system is
that support can be matched to the needs of students, whatever those may be. The tiered delivery system
also allows for layering — students receiving multiple supports at the same time, such as Tier 1 and Tier 3
services. This provides a framework for ensuring that all student needs are met. 

5. Universal Screening
Screeners are assessments that are provided to all students to help identify students needing additional
support. Each school uses different screeners, but they are commonly used to assess vision and hearing,
literacy, math skills, and social-emotional health. When students receive results on screeners that indicate
concern, they may be referred to Tier 2 and/or Tier 3 services.

6. Data-informed Decision Making
Data-informed decision making is used to identify students in need of intervention, measure the
effectiveness of programs in place, and make decisions on school improvement. Data can come from
many sources: screening assessments, school records (e.g., attendance, grades, and office discipline
referrals), and observations from teachers, families, or other staff. 

7. Progress Monitoring
Progress monitoring is a process that occurs across all three tiers and uses data to measure student
progress. This process involves setting goals, collecting data, and using the data to determine if goals are
being met. Then, interventions can be modified depending on the results.

8. Cultural Humility
Cultural humility involves awareness of and responsiveness to the great amount of diversity that exists in
school communities. Some best practices for supporting cultural humility include fostering a community
of acceptance and respect, offering implicit bias training, and using disaggregated data to assess and
address disproportionality.

What is Tier 1 Support? A Closer Look at the Fundamentals of Tier 1
As mentioned earlier, this course is focused on the Tier 1 level of MTSS. Tier 1 forms the foundation of our pyramid: Tier 1 practices are universally applied and available for all students.
MTSS pyramid with Tier 1 bolded: School-wide or class-wide prevention/promotion for ALL
At their best, Tier 1 practices are  p r o a c t i v e and p r e v e n t i v e, reducing the need for Tier 2 and Tier 3
services. Tier 1 support ideally meets needs and promotes healthy development for 80-90% of
students, with 10-20% needing Tier 2 and/or Tier 3.  
To hear more about the importance of Tier 1, watch the
video below featuring Andy Sevlin, a district MTSS
coordinator.
As Andy said, ensuring a solid, effective Tier 1 is critical to prevent the “hopping” from one
crisis to another. If a signiﬁcant number of students are being identiﬁed or referred to Tier 2
and Tier 3 services, it’s important to examine your Tier 1 practices. For example, if 35% of
students have several offce discipline referrals and need behavior interventions, effective and
effcient universal practices may be missing or inadequate at Tier 1. If this is the case, below are
issues to consider:
1. Behavior expectations may not be clear to students or educators
2. Instructional practices may not be evidence-based or delivered with consistency or
ﬁdelity (i.e., as intended)
3. Additional barriers to effective practice may be contributing
In summary, if signiﬁcantly more than 20% of students in your school are receiving Tier 2 or 3
services, this calls for a review of Tier 1 practices.  

An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. -Benjamin Franklin, Founding Father & Inventor
For some ideas on how to provide strong Tier 1 support, review the points below. You may
recognize some of these practices from your own school, or you may want to learn more about
them. Stay tuned for more information on each of these practices!

IMAGE HERE


List of Tier 1 best practices
Some of these practices, including but not limited to family-school home visits or schoolwide
expectations, you will learn about in later lessons in this course! For now, it is important to
know that these practices are an outcome of Tier 1’s development.




MTSS Infrastructure, Using Tier 1 Development to Strengthen the Framework
We discussed Tier 1 as the foundation of our district and school MTSS. To take this a step
further, you can think about your Tier 1 development activities as the building blocks behind the
foundation’s infrastructure. When the infrastructure is strong, Tier 1 becomes more robust and
sustainable. This may sound fantastic to you but feel vague and unattainable. You may be asking,
“How, exactly, does this happen? What does this look like in my district and school?” Don’t
worry. There are practical steps for developing Tier 1 at your school, and you can review them
below. These steps can apply to MTSS as a whole, but in this lesson, you will learn more about
them in the context of Tier 1.




Planning
When district and school teams are designing an MTSS for their populations, folks are eager
and ready to get started. This excitement is a good thing! However, it really is necessary to take
the time to plan systems on the front end. By taking steps to carefully and practically develop
programming, it is more likely that schools can follow through on plans rather than burn out
quickly. As the popular phrase goes, “Measure twice, cut once!”
Planning can take many forms. go through the cards below to learn more.

measurement tools: Use measurement tools to narrow your focus. The Self Assessment of MTSS Implementation (SAM 2.0; linked below), endorsed by the SC Department of Education, is one way to gauge your school’s MTSS functioning in 6 domains: leadership, building the capacity and/or infrastructure for implementation, communication and collaboration, data-based problem-solving, the three-tiered instructional and intervention model, and data-evaluation. 

Collaboration: Planning is done best with the input of everyone involved. You wouldn’t build a house without consulting the people who live in it, or an office without taking feedback from those working in it! Conversations with families and community members offer powerful insight into what is important to stakeholders outside the school building. Asking for their input in the planning process instead of their feedback after the fact also encourages trust and respect between schools, families, and community members! 

Data: Examine your school's discipline data thoroughly. Go beyond suspensions into offfce and classroom discipline referrals to look for patterns that need to be addressed. This can look like teacher referrals, attendance,
student self-referral, and more!


Building a System
MTSS is a framework, not a recipe. The Tier 1 system your team builds will act as the scaffolding
or structure for the interventions you choose. The interventions themselves will be unique to
your school based on your needs assessment, input from families and the community, and the
priorities of your MTSS team. For one school, increasing regular attendance may be a top
priority. At another school, teaching students to cooperate with one another may be the main
concern. Keep in mind that the concerns can shift over time. Perhaps once attendance is
addressed, another concern rises to the top. That’s okay! Because MTSS is a framework, you
can use the basic structure of the three-tiered system and adapt the interventions to what your
students, families, and school community need.
Administrators and educators often discuss scaffolding for students when it comes to building
new skills. That is, providing support to meet them where they are, and providing help as they
need it. Think of MTSS in the same way. We are providing supports for our students, families,
and school community to help build skills. MTSS is scaffolding, with interventions selected to
address speciﬁc needs.
When done well, MTSS provides a lasting structure that serves the entire school population. We
don’t want to put our energy into something that will fall to the wayside in a year or two. You
might be wondering how to tell if your school or district is working on a "project" or truly
building a system. Consider how heavily your family and community partners are involved, the
amount of focus on long-range planning, and the inclusion of periodic ﬁdelity checks to make
sure Tier 1 operations are strong. Later on in this lesson, you’ll learn about implementation with
ﬁdelity. There, you’ll ﬁnd measures and resources that will further help you answer your
questions about where your school or district is at with MTSS implementation!If we are using so much of our time, resources, and ingenuity, we want to build a system that
will improve the lives of our students and their families for years to come.


Teaming Structures
Teaming structures, or how your teams for MTSS are set up, are a key component of your MTSS.
Some schools choose to have one MTSS team to cover all students' concerns, while some
schools split their MTSS teams into “academics” and “behavior.” Your team will decide what
teaming structure makes the most sense for your group.
Let’s hear from Jodie Soracco, Director of the Virginia
Tiered Systems and Support Research and
Implementation Center, for more tips on teaming
structures.
As Jodie said, it’s crucial to think about effciency when designing
teaming structures. Look carefully before breaking off into sub-
committees and adding more meetings. With advanced planning,
sticking to an agenda, and pulling data before a meeting, you can
maximize the time you have as an MTSS team and avoid the meeting
merry-go-round.


Long Term Perspective
When developing MTSS as a school or district, it is necessary to need to factor in the amount of
time it takes to reach full implementation. Typically, this is a years-long process. Don’t be
discouraged, though! Although it may seem daunting, this long-range perspective is a good
thing. Your school or district does not need to do everything at once.
Take it one step at a time. What themes came out of your needs assessment? What are the top
concerns your MTSS team wants to address? How will this look at Tier 1? Take the time now to
focus on manageable steps towards implementation. It will all come together.

Fidelity
Fidelity of implementation might sound intimidating at ﬁrst. All this really means is that we’re
checking on ourselves to make sure we are using interventions as they were intended. Of
course, real-world conditions can’t 100% match research-level implementation, but that’s ok.
Real life is messy sometimes. We do, however, want to get as close to the original intervention
design as we can. This helps us reach our intended intervention outcomes for our students and
families. Remember that ﬁdelity checks happen at all 3 tiers of MTSS! 
Check out this video with Kaci Fleetwood, faculty at the University of Nevada-Reno and State
Coordinator for MTSS, for more about measuring ﬁdelity.
Check out this video with Kaci Fleetwood, faculty at the
University of Nevada-Reno and State Coordinator for
MTSS, for more about measuring ffdelity.
Fidelity inventories help us understand in which areas of our implementation we are doing well,
and where we can improve. Fidelity should never be an assumption, especially for interventions
that have been in place for a while. Checking on our ﬁdelity periodically, as a group, helps us all
improve and make sure our interventions are effective. If the intervention does not have the
outcome we expected, this allows us to rule out ﬁdelity as a problem.
There are a variety of ﬁdelity measures available. As mentioned earlier, the Self-Assessment
Measure (SAM 2.0) is a free tool to evaluate school-level MTSS implementation and is endorsed
by the SC State Department of Education. 

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
Here's a brief recap of what you've learned thus far today:
1. A strong Tier 1 is the foundation upon which all of MTSS can stand.
2. Tier 1 practices are preventive and proactive.
3. Developing Tier 1 involves planning, a focus on building a system and not just a "one-time project", communicating with families and community members, solidifying a teaming structure that works for your school, and a long-term
perspective.

As you know, Tier 1 support has many facets. To build your knowledge of Tier 1, you will review
the following topics in this course
1. Elevating Family and Student Engagement
2. School Climate and Safety Enhancement
3. Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations
4. Wellness Enhancement and Stress Reduction for Faculty, Staff, and Students


@@@@@
Lesson 2 of 3: Family & Student Engagement
Outcomes:
1. Demonstrate the importance of leadership's support in elevating strategies to
strengthen outcomes for staff, families, and students
2. Grow in the capability to engage with historically marginalized or otherwise involved
families and students
3. Understand and apply the strategies for restoring relationships with families


Elevating Family Engagement, A Reminder from the SBHA to You
You brieﬂy learned about strengthening school-family-community partnerships in the Core
MTSS course. You've been over the theories, the motivations, and the desired outcomes. This
lesson will go even deeper into why family engagement matters and covers practical ways you,
as a member of a school system, can elevate family engagement in Tier 1. To start, let's recap
what family engagement really means.

What is Family Engagement?
The key elements in both deﬁnitions are active engagement for the betterment of student’s
lives and outcomes. Just as schools aren’t vessels only for academics, families aren’t vessels
only for nurturance and socialization. The role families play in schools cannot be overstated.
Families are the ones who get their students ready for school, pack their lunches, talk to them
about their experiences at school, check their homework, and welcome them home at the end
of the day. Caregivers are the experts on their children, and when they are partnered with
schools, they are powerful forces of change and good. Those in education know this.
Here is what Molly M. Spearman, South Carolina's Superintendent of Education from 2015-
2023, says: “Family engagement is of utmost importance in ensuring each
student has an opportunity to be college, career, and citizenship ready
upon graduation.”
As many educators know, family engagement is not easy or even straightforward! Just like each
student is unique, so is their family. It can be overwhelming to think about elevating family
engagement on your own, but this doesn’t rest on your shoulders alone.
In this lesson, we’ll review practical strategies you can use to elevate family engagement for
every student and every family. This elevation of family engagement starts with clearly
emphasizing the importance of leadership support and involvement. The demonstrated positive
outcomes family engagement has for everyone—students, staff, leadership, and you — can be
the motivation for leadership's support in this endeavor!


The Need for Leadership in Family Engagement, The Role of Leadership in Building Bridges and Breaking Barriers
School leadership builds bridges and breaks down barriers fostering strong and meaningful
connections between families and the educational community. A challenge schools frequently
face is changing from sporadic, event-based family involvement to systemic, integrated family
partnership. To facilitate this shift from one-sided communication to collaborative co-creation,
it is crucial for schools' leadership to actively take the role of bridge-builders and advocates.
Through meaningful connections between families and the educational community, school
leaders play an instrumental role in nurturing an environment that is dedicated to elevating
family engagement. 
Think about a time in your life when you or a colleague, sibling, etc., attempted to facilitate
change in the environment. Whether it was an offce-wide shift or a family policy, what
happened without support from the top? More often than not, those changes die without the
reinforcement of leadership. Leadership support is necessary to bridge the gap between family
engagement theory and reality.
Leadership supporting family engagement is necessary as they:
1. Establish conditions necessary for sustainable family engagement
2. Create expectations between families and educators
3. Provide opportunities for engagement
4. Ensure the needed resources and efforts for family engagemen
When we say leadership, you may be wondering which leadership team? School level? District
level? Indeed, it is important to talk about the different aspects of leadership in this context.
Leadership refers to both district level and school level authority, each carrying distinct
responsibilities for fostering family engagement. At the district level, leadership should ensure
resources and initiatives to facilitate family engagement. On the school level, leadership shouldt establish initiatives for sustained family engagement, set clear expectations for collaboration
between families and educators and offer opportunities for meaningful engagement.
That being said, the role of educators, staff, and families should not be forgotten. Educators and
staff contribute by actively participating in engagement initiatives, while families also play a vital
role in their commitment to fostering collaborative partnerships.


How Can Leadership Be Involved?
Leadership involvement, such as the principal and administrative team, strengthens family
engagement as a priority by explicitly integrating it into the school’s values, mission, and goals
for each academic year. It is essential to emphasize that leadership is the driving force behind
these policies and decisions, ﬁrmly establishing the framework for effective family
engagement. An example of this proactive approach can be found in South Carolina’s Marion
County School District! 
Marion County School District places “Strengthen Community” as one of their core values,
elaborating on it as, “We view education as a partnership among students, parents, families, and the community." This tangible commitment to collaboration exempliﬁes how leadership
sets the stage for fostering robust family engagement. 
This is further voiced in their Mission Statement:
When creating core values or a mission statement, leadership can include in its evaluation the
values, beliefs, attitudes, skills, and needs of families and educators. With these ﬁndings in
mind, leadership can supply opportunities for relationship building before and throughout the
school year.

Empowering Leadership: Breaking Barriers for Inclusive Family Engagement
When planning for family engagement activities, principals, administrative teams, and others in
leadership positions are the ones who allocate resources such as building space and ﬁnances,
as well as assign roles. As you will learn throughout the rest of this lesson, many families face
barriers to engaging as partners with schools at events. Some of these barriers are adequate
space for meetings, provision for childcare or food, and availability of faculty to staff the event.
Because school leadership is responsible for allocating resources, their support is crucial to
remove these barriers. Go through below to see some practical examples.
Creating standards for educators to meet for family engagement both on and off school property.
Examples: Timelines to call each student’s family during summer and start of school year and to complete
home visits.
Compensating families
Compensation for families on Tier 1 teams or on any leadership team where other participants are within
their employed roles or compensated positions.
Establishing rooms designated for family engagement
Example: Assigning different classrooms as different meeting points, such as Mr. Bartlett's classroom for
9th grade parents, Ms. Jenkins' classroom for 4th grade parents, and the auditorium for schoolwide
meetings.
Creating opportunities for educators to engage with families
Examples: Set days for home visits or off-property visits, and gas compensation.
Setting aside funds and resources for food and transportation
Examples: Buses for picking up families, gas station gift cards for families coming from over a certain
distance away, and a food budget.

Individuals with such a high role of inﬂuence can leverage the abilities of each staff and faculty
member, student, and family to support student outcomes within Tier 1. 
Involving leadership at Tier 1 with family engagement requires both adaptive and technical
leadership.
Adaptive Leadership: “who, what, why” leaders who focus on the big picture, motivation,
and goals.
Technical Leadership: “how and when” leaders who support the procedures necessary to
implement the decided-upon practices (Eagle et al., 2015).
Can you identify a person or group of people who can clearly see a larger vision? What about
individuals who see the short-term step-by-step needs to be met to achieve an overarching
goal? Are you either type? When elevating family engagement, both are needed!
It can be easy to put the "why" and "how" for family engagement into words. It's much more
diffcult to put these practices into action.
Don’t worry. We will see examples of this later on!
A Reminder
It may feel overwhelming to spend signiﬁcant amounts of energy, time, and strategy on
changing or adapting an entire system. Remind yourself and your leaders that a Multi-Tiered
System of Supports (MTSS) is not a destination but a journey that evolves over time. Systematic
change is slow and deliberate. If family engagement is a struggle at your school, do not lose
heart! Each small step is still a step forward. 
!What matters when getting leadership on board is not perfection but
persistence.
Putting signiﬁcant amounts of time, energy, and resources into family engagement can feel like
a big task. Reviewing the beneﬁts for families and students can remind everyone why it matters,
and that's where we're headed now

The Beneffts of Family Engagement, Why Family Engagement Matters for All-Educators, Families, and Students
When families are engaged within a school, it promotes alignment between the two on their
values, expectations, and desires for students. For families with minority backgrounds,
authentic engagement rooted in shared stories leads to more comfort with educators. Engaged
families hold higher aspirations for their children, have better communication with their kids,
and have a more favorable view of their child’s educator (Baker et al., 2016).
Family engagement becomes empowerment; families become more conﬁdent in their own
capabilities to help their children as students and to understand the educational system. They
also gain a better understanding of how they ﬁt in with their child’s education. One study with
keep track
Provide resources to facilitate engagement, such as a
room, food, and transportation via gas station cardsover 50 interviews and focus groups between students, families, and staff, found that family
engagement built capacity in families to help with English-speaking, math, and leadership
skills (Westrich & Strobel, 2013). This beneﬁts teachers too: staff reported an eased workload,
reduced disciplinary issues, and improved school unity, morale, and quality when families were
engaged. Teachers with engaged parents feel more supported in their own work with students. 
Every family, every student, and every educator beneﬁts from family-school engagement at
Tier 1, and having Tier 1 family engagement supports the more specialized engagements at
tiers 2 and 3.

TABLE HERE


You now have a clearer picture of why family engagement matters to everyone — leadership,
educators, staff, families, and students. Let’s brieﬂy review the barriers that make family
engagement diffcult outlined in the image below!


Barriers families and educators face when trying to engage
IMAGE HERE

These are a few of the common barriers that you've most likely already experienced as an
educator. The good news is that we’re here to offer solutions for overcoming these obstacles!
As we pivot to practical strategies to elevate family engagement at Tier 1, let’s ﬁrst frame
ourselves within South Carolina’s Department of Education’s standards for family engagement.


Engaging with Families We Find Diffcult to Engage:
Family engagement would be easy if each educator and each family were motivated to work with
one another as equal partners.
However, we know that isn’t always the case.
Some families and educators resist engagement, and some relationships between educators and
families are fractured.
Signiﬁcant barriers impede engagement for families and educators, and trying to use the same
tools we use with already engaged families won’t be as effective if we don’t speciﬁcally address
the needs of each family. In this section, you are going to look at two types of specialized
engagement:
engaging families that are historically marginalized, ignored, or unreached by the school
engaging families that have a fractured relationship with the school



Engaging with Families Marginalized from the School Community:
Deﬁning a family that proves challenging to involve is signiﬁcant; biases and preconceptions
arise upon encountering terms like "disengaged families," "at-risk families," and
"marginalized families." Bemak and Cornely (2002) draw a line here, separating families
integrated within the school community from those on its periphery. The former are proactive
and vocal, whereas the latter are often seen as historically inaccessible, distant, or removed
from the school.
Let’s be abundantly clear here: this distance is nota character judgment
of the family but the reality of the multifaceted barriers in their way. 

You have already reviewed the common barriers families and educators face when trying to elevate family engagement. Other key barriers are listed below.
1) Low income or unexpected drop in income; personal debt; unemployment
2) Emotional unavailability due to mental health or life experiences; fear of violence
from partner; overwhelmed by childrearing; lack of trust that educators understand
their unique needs
3) Disabilities; alcohol and substance abuse
4) Experiences of racism, sexism, homophobia; discrimination; historically negative
experiences with educational systems
These barriers are not a reﬂection of families' desires or their relationship to their child. We
have to remember what Harper and Mapp said so clearly in 2006:
We have to absolutely believe in our soulsthat families want to support their
children.”
Harper and Mapp, 2006


You are now going over a few commonly experienced methods to engage marginalized families.
Keep the following statement in mind as we look at these strategies: To engage families in a
school context, sometimes you need to respond to their needs outside of the school. Let's start!

1) Food & Transportation–
Families who wrestle with food insecurity can beneﬁt from a program such as “Backpack
Bakers," where families in the district donate canned food and personal hygiene items to be
distributed to school families or students in need within the school. This is also a great way to
engage with community partners such as local businesses or faith-based institutions!
Transportation can be extremely diffcult for families. Use school buses to pick up families for
school-wide events or offer gas gift cards for families. With leadership support, a budget can be
set for transportation costs or standards for cents per mile.
2) Childcare & Time–
Host events that align with what a family would already be doing. For example, dinner typically
occurs between 6:00-8:00 PM. For families with multiple children, leaving certain kids at home
to visit one child’s school can be diffcult in terms of childcare or feeding them. Hosting events
such as a fundraiser or teacher-parent meeting at a local restaurant, such as Chick-ﬁl-A®, Cicis
Pizza™, etc., can be a great middle-ground because the entire family can have dinner while also
being engaged. This can also happen within a school where food is provided by leadership,
catered by a restaurant, or made by families on the school board or PTA.
3) Communication–
Communication ought to be accessible for all. Families that don’t speak English as a ﬁrst
language can especially struggle in school settings. Host events in their ﬁrst language if you have
a prominent number of families with another ﬁrst language and include a translator at school-
wide events. While translators are great, hiring personnel who are bilingual or multilingual can
provide even more comfort to families knowing that their students, as well as themselves, are
connected to a school that has more routine accessibility. You want to avoid using students as
their families’ translator, as this can create confusing roles for them in the situation. Further,
ensure that all signs and paperwork are offered in multiple languages. It may also be helpful to
have bilingual staff greeting families dropping children off.

In addition to incorporating other languages, adapt communication to meet the cultural norms
and practices of families. Some families prefer texting only after school hours with no calls unless
for emergencies. Others want a formal conference instead of an informal conversation and vice
versa. Make sure that interactions are happening with the appropriate family member, such as a
family whose grandmother is signiﬁcantly involved in the student’s education.

Some families may not have access to reliable internet or strong cellular data, limiting their
access to emails texts, or phone calls. Further, notes sent home can be a barrier depending on
literacy levels. To overcome these challenges and prevent frustration over a lack ofcommunication, use physical home visits where communication preferences and needs can be
discussed. This can also be accomplished at school during events. To protect against
forgetfulness and provide expectations for communication, give parents a syllabus at the start of
the semester that includes a communication plan that is signed by both families and students. 
4) Representation–
Families with culturally, racially, or ethnically diverse backgrounds value their representation in
the school setting (Hopper, 2020). This includes positions in staff, faculty, and membership
among leadership teams or focus groups, and at events like International Night.
As previously mentioned, families are more likely to believe that leadership cares about their
stories and background when they are aware that staff and faculty are taking continuing
education courses or workshops on their culture. Hiring diverse staff is not enough in and of
itself; faculty and staff need to be aware of family needs and how to practically respond to them.
For example, a district in Washington places family liaisons at elementary schools in areas with
growing immigrant and refugee families to match that school’s particular needs.
5) Professional Development–
For cultural events and multilingual signs to make an impact, they need to be backed by faculty
and staff who are continuing to grow professionally in their understanding of cultural
responsiveness, equity, and restoration. Support staff in their professional development related
to mindset, skills, and practices regarding family engagement: for example:
self-assessing one’s own identity and culture within the school context
studying the distinction between behavioral challenges and cultural differences
learning conﬂict resolution skills to address cultural differences 
Let families know about the professional development courses and opportunities that are being
offered to staff. This could be in an email with weekly updates, or on the school website. It is key
to match the engagement plans and decisions to the community. In Georgia, for example, a
district with a growing number of Latino/a families provided professional development
regarding English learning and cultural competency. In addition, the district offered workshopswith community experts regarding instructions and engagement practices to match the needs of
diverse families.
6) Information–
The educational system can be extremely intimidating from the outside looking in. The language
of the educational system, the history of education in the United States, and the power imbalance
between families and staff, faculty, and educators are diffcult for many to navigate. To
counteract this dynamic, avoid using jargon in your conversations or signage. Have family
volunteers, staff, or students offer tours of the school building before a schoolyear starts for new
families or parents and caregivers who are interested. On bulletin boards or website pages,
provide information on school resources, where services are available, courses and enrollment,
etc., in clearly marked links or titles and in multiple languages. 

Even if families were educated within the United States, they most likely were not educated at the
same school as their children. If they were educated at the same school, structures and processes
have most likely changed. Parents cannot support their children in education or engage if they do
not understand the process or mechanisms of education. Resources, focus groups, and school
tours that explain the “what” and “why” of education are important to boost family conﬁdence
in engaging with a school (Hopper, 2020). You want caregivers and parents to be able to advocate
for their children; ensure that they are given the tools to do so.
7) Physical Engagement–
Both parties, families and school staff and faculty, can be skeptical of each other. Bridging that
gap requires intentional engagement. For a start, a “windshield assessment” can be conducted by
staff, like one project conducted by Blitz et al. (2013). Physically driving through the community
and evaluating visible signs of strengths and needs increased educators' familiarity with their
students' background. Community members were engaged through conversations to discuss
their own perceptions of their community and the school. In terms of increasing families’
familiarity with schools, the aforementioned school tours can do this, as can a video tour to share
with families if they’re unable to come physically.
8) Programs & Focus Groups–
The resources offered by schools should match the community's want s or needs. Families can be
brought together to discuss educational barriers they see between themselves and their student,
their needs, and their understanding of where the student stands with the school. This discussion
ought to be facilitated by school counselors or family liaisons while teachers are present. Further,
when preparing a focus group or meeting of any length, take input from families about what days
and duration of time work for them. 

As previously mentioned, removing transportation, food, and childcare barriers is the
infrastructure behind these meetings and focus groups. Marginalized communities have a history
of being let down by institutions or organizations that claim to help them. To establish trust and
respect, break the cycle of offering words instead of action, and ensure that the suggestions,
input, and feedback from families are taken seriously and implemented within schools through
tangible ways.
Here are a few ideas for potentially relevant programs your school can offer in response to the
barriers or needs some marginalized families have outlined: 
a) Financial Aid Night where families can come ﬁll out ﬁnancially related forms, learn about
ﬁnancial literacy, and speak to ﬁnancial advisors or experts. 
b) Parent University where families can have access to learning about their students’
education, preparation for college applications; families and students on committees
(Gulledge, 2021). 
c) Monthly Saturday workshops where relevant topics in the community (e.g., an upcoming
election) or general topics that connect schools and families (e.g., an open forum discussing
how a middle school can better prepare students for the transition to high school).
9)Support Family's Relationship to Their Students–
Many families feel underprepared to support their children with homework, especially as
children get older. Language can be a barrier, as can understanding what educators want from an
assignment. Sending home content-speciﬁc resources, videos, pamphlets, and clear instructions
can mitigate the confusion caused by homework. Further, receiving parents’ feedback on their
ability to help their students with homework can increase participation and encourage
collaboration.These are simply overview examples of equitable and culturally responsive practices that work
to move families that are marginalized into families that are integrated into our schools. You can
most likely think of strategies you or your school are already using that weren't listed here!

Engaging with Families in Rural Areas:
You’ve reviewed a lot of strategies today. You may be, understandably, thinking: "How does this
even work practically? What does it actually look like?" Those questions make sense. The work
we've described is both broad and speciﬁc and can feel like a tall order. As both a motivator that
this work is possible and a practical example of what the work looks like, we're going to go
through strategies used in a research study on family engagement.
This study, conducted by Lisa Blitz and their team in 2013, was chosen for a reason: it focused
on elevating engagement in rural areas, a challenge many school districts (potentially your
own!) face in South Carolina. 
Let's review some facts about rurality in South Carolina.
IMAGE HERE
Information about rural areas in South Carolina
How do educators and school staff care for, connect with, and uplift families and students in
rural communities through family engagement?
The starting point involves self-education.
While poverty is a challenge no matter what geographical area you live in, it is prominent in
South Carolina’s rural areas, as you may have noticed from the graphic. While you are going to
learn more about poverty as a stressor in the lesson on wellness enhancement, for now, we are
going to go through a poverty simulation, SPENT, hosted by Urban Ministries of Durham, a
homeless ministry. 
Click on the following link to start!
SPENT
Urban Ministries of Durham serves over 6000 people every year who struggle
with poverty and homelessness. Spent is an interactive game created by
McKinney that challenges you to manage your money, raise a child and make it
through the month getting paid minimum wage after a stretch of
unemployment.
READ MORE PLAYSPENT 
We want to acknowledge that you may be familiar with poverty already. You may have lived
through it, come from a family history of it, or seen loved ones struggle. Even if you’ve never
experienced poverty yourself or in your close circles, you probably have a good idea of how
poverty impacts students. We want to validate those experiences! This simulation is simply
another perspective to consider.
As we said earlier, we are walking through this example
as a motivator that everything we've discussed in this
lesson can be done! Let's get into it!
“Prevention through Collaboration: Family Engagement
with Rural Schools Experiencing Poverty" Blitz et. al 2013
The article "Prevention through Collaboration: Family Engagement with Rural Schools and
Families Living in Poverty" emphasizes the importance of collaboration between schools and
families to support children living in poverty in rural areas. The authors suggest several effective
strategies that can be used to support families experiencing poverty.
a) Creating a welcoming and supportive environment: Schools can create a warm and
welcoming atmosphere that makes families feel valued and included. This can be
achieved through initiatives such as parent-teacher conferences, family events, and
other forms of outreach.
b) Building relationships: Schools can encourage parents and
caregivers to build positive relationships with teachers and
other school staff. This can foster trust and open lines of
communication, which can be particularly helpful when
addressing sensitive issues such as academic struggles.
c) Encouraging parent and caregiver involvement: Schools can provide opportunities
for parents to become more involved in their children's education, such as
volunteering in the classroom, attending school events, and joining parent-teacher
associations.
d) Advocating for families: Schools can help families access resources and support
services, such as tutoring, counseling, and healthcare. They can also advocate for
policies and programs that beneﬁt families living in poverty.
e) Providing targeted interventions: Schools can provide targeted interventions that
address the speciﬁc needs of children living in poverty. For example, they can offer
afterschool programs that provide homework help, tutoring, and enrichment
activities.
Overall, the article emphasizes that collaboration and partnership between schools and families
can be a powerful tool for supporting children living in poverty in rural areas. By working
together, schools and families can help to prevent academic struggles, reduce risky behaviors,
and promote positive outcomes for children.
Let's expand on the generalized strategy bullets above by looking
at practical examples for each element. Be sure to congratulate
yourself for the strategies you are already applying!
1) Welcoming and supportive Enviornment: Schools can host family events such as back-to-school nights,
open houses, and community dinners to build relationships with families. Schools can also
implement programs to welcome new families, such as home or community center
visits or personalized welcome packets.
2) Building Relationship: Teachers can reach out to families through phone calls, emails, or in-person meetings to discuss their child's progress or address any concerns. Schools can also establish a family liaison or parent coordinator position to help build connections between families and the school. 
3) Encouraging caregiver involvement: Schools can offer a variety of opportunities for parent involvement, such as parent-teacher conferences, volunteer opportunities, and school decision-making committees. They can also provide resources for families to help support their children's learning at home, such as book lists, reading tips, and educational websites. 
4) Advocating for families: Schools can help families access resources in the community, such as food pantries, healthcare clinics, and job training programs. They can also advocate for policies and programs that benefit families living in poverty, such as increased funding for school behavioral health resources and services or expanded access to pre-K programs. 
5) Targated Interventions: targeted interventions: Schools can offer targeted interventions to address the specific needs of children living in poverty, such as summer learning programs, afterschool tutoring, and mentorship programs. They can also provide resources for families, such as financial literacy classes, parenting workshops, and mental health services.  We will talk more about these targeted interventions in your next course "Reeling in the Supports with Tier 2"
Throughout the case study partnership with rural schools, a
provide resources for families,
number of methods were used by the research team to support
the recommended strategies, including "Parent Leadership
classes parenting workshops
Training Courses (PLTC)". Let's review a few more practical
strategies.
such as ffnancial literacy
a) Parent Leadership Training Course (PLTC) –
The PLTC is a program designed to empower parents to become more involved in their child's
education by providing them with the skills and knowledge needed to be effective advocates for
their children.
b) Financial literacy classes –
Schools can offer ﬁnancial literacy classes to help families better manage their ﬁnances and
navigate economic challenges.
c) Family liaisons or parent coordinators –
Blitz et.al (2013) recommend that schools establish a family liaison or parent coordinator
position to help build connections between families and the school and provide support to families in accessing resources and services.

These practical examples of applying strategies in a rural community is a reminder that you may
be bored of hearing at this point but cannot be overstated: The strategies and tools implemented
to engage families ought to be tailored to the needs of the families in your community. There is
no textbook plan or “sure ﬁre” way to elevate engagement with all families immediately. As
demonstrated by Blitz et al. (2013), elevating family engagement in diffcult to reach groups
takes time, patience, intentionality, and support. And—it is beyond worth it.
Family engagement is family empowerment, as seen in the graduates of the parent leadership
training course. 
"It was the first time any of the parents had graduated from any type
of course or training, and they were bursting with pride."
And this empowerment leads to actual change with real impact. A story told by one of the
mothers in Blitz's study demonstrates this beautifully:
IMAGE HERE
A quote from Blitz et al. (2013)
Up until now, we’ve focused primarily on initiating engagement with families. We’re going to
pivot now to restoring engagement with families when a relationship has been fractured.
Knowledge Check

Restoring Relationships with Families
Rebuilding Bridges: Strategies for Restoring Relationships with
Families in Education
For the majority of the students in a teacher’s classroom, their relationship to one another is
established and maintained through more straightforward means: a smile at the door with a
greeting, asking about their weekend, and checking-in on them before and after large
assignments. The same goes for most student’s families—educators maintain the relationship
through a quick email, handshakes and hugs on back-to-school nights, and hallway chats
during student performances. For a certain percentage, however, the relationship between
student, family, and teacher needs restoration.
a) These relationships are characterized by “giving up:”
Teachers have given up on engaging with families or the student. For families that
are stigmatized or ostracized, teachers may be pressured to disengage or partake in
discussing the families in a negative light.
b) The student has given up on trying and on feeling heard.
c) Families have given up on a relationship with their student’s teacher or even with
the student themselves.
How do we overcome the frustration and stigma to get these families
and their student the help they need?
The answer comes in restorative practices.
While many schools are trained in restorative practices, the training can vary signiﬁcantly.
When we say, “restorative practices,” we are referring to a broader version than you may be
familiar with. 
Restorative practices are the strategies used to repair relationships between everyone in the
school setting—between teachers, staff, students, families, and faculty.
While this may include juvenile justice, it expands beyond those involved in the criminal justice
system to everyone connected to your school, including families. You, understandably, might be
thinking:
If a family simply doesn’t want to engage, or has been hurt by a school and no
longer wants to be near a school representative, how in the worldam I going to get
them involved in restorative practices?
We hear you. This is hard work, and results don’t come immediately. Remind yourself that you
are not responsible for the actions of another; you cannot make a family do or stop something.
All you can do is your best, what you’re asked to do.
Let's review some practical strategies you can use.

Restoration Strategies
Practically restoring relationships takes time, patience, and humility. There are a variety of
frameworks used for restorative practices, such as the Five R’s of Restorative Justice:
-relationship
-respect
-responsibility
-repair
-reintegration
See the attached article from the Conffict Center that
gives a deeper analysis of the Five R’s!
The 5 R's of Restorative Justice - Conffict Center
A great way to understand the Restorative Justice Community Group Conference
process is to look at it through the lens of the 5 R's: Relationship, Respect,
Responsibility, Repair, and Reintegration (credited to Beverly Title, founder of
Resolutionaries). Read the restorative practices overview or skip to the 5 R's
below!
READ MORE CONFLICT CENTER 

Establish-Maintain-Restore
A framework developed speciﬁcally for schools is the Establish-Maintain-Restore framework,
also known as the Equity Explicit Establish-Maintain-Restore (EE-EMR) framework. While
originally designed for student-educator relationships (Cook et al., 2018; Gaias et al., 2020), the
Equity Explicit Establish-Main-Restore (EE-EMR) framework provides extremely helpful
guidelines for restoring family-educator relationships.
You are going to brieﬂy look at practical strategies to establish, maintain, and restore
relationships between families and educators. You will go much more in depth on Establish-
Maintain-Restore in the lesson on school climate! 
TABLE HERE
Like we said earlier, we know this is hard work. Here are
a few more resources to help support your efforts! They
cover restorative practices, as well as Conffict
Resolution Education (CRE).

Resources for Teachers
Resources for Teachers This section of the site is focused on providing practical
information and resources that teachers, teachers-in-training and teachers-
of-teachers will ﬁnd useful. Use the sidebar menu to explore speciﬁc areas of
CRE practice . Here's a few activities for classroom use that can help infuse
conﬂict resolution ideas into the learning environment.
School Resources
Quick guide on making school climate improvements (U.S. Department of
Education) Fostering healthy relationships and promoting positive discipline in
schools (Schott Foundation's National Opportunity to Learn Campaign) How
can we ﬁx school discipline toolkit (Fix School Discipline) Visit the Fix School
Discipline website and download resources for educators and the community,
as well as the mini toolkit.
As you push through the challenge, remind yourself that your progress can be exponential.
Families talk to one another. Making inroads with one caregiver can very well inﬂuence the
families in that caregiver’s social circle as they share their experiences with one another.
By focusing on families that may be challenging to engage because of their speciﬁc, intensive
needs, we prepare a foundation for better staff, family, student and school climate outcomes! As
you work through the next lesson on school climate and safety, think through the role of family
engagement in improving them.
You have spent a lot of time reviewing strategies to elevate or restore family engagement. Let’s
work through a scenario together before moving into the summary!

IMAGE HERE First day of school case study
IMAGE HERE Jaden's Story


Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
1) Leadership support in family engagement is crucial; leadership can elevate family
engagement by setting aside resources (e.g., money, time, space), creating
opportunities for family engagement (e.g., calendar dates for events, professional
development), and explicitly including family engagement as a core value in their
mission statement or vision.
2) There are a multitude of barriers between schools and families that hinder
engagement. Some of the ones were: transportation diffculties, scheduling,
distrust of school systems, non-English speaking as a ﬁrst language, and having
children in different grades across different schools.
3) Certain families struggle with family engagement more than
others. You learned about engaging with families on the
outskirts, using many of the strategies that were previously
discussed but with a different mindset.
4) Restoring relationships through the EE-EMR framework involves the same
humility and patience needed to engage with all families, just in a different setting.
Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways

@@@@@
Lesson 3 of 3
Elevating Engagement in Practical Ways
Outcomes:
1. Translate theoretical concepts into practical strategies that foster strong partnerships
between schools and families
2. Explore the principles and strategies of family engagement within the context of South
Carolina's education system
3. Feel equipped to implement plans for elevating family engagement in line with South
Carolina's K-12 Framework's ﬁve strategies for building relationships, communication,
linking families to learning outcomes, collaborative practices, and community
partnership
Elevating Family Engagement
From Theory to Action in Elevating Family Engagement
As you continue to explore the realm of family engagement, we, the SBHA, build upon the
foundational understanding established in the previous lesson, Elevating Family and Student
Engagement. In the prior lesson, you learned about the critical role of leadership support in
driving strategies to enhance outcomes for staff, families, and students. You also gained an
understanding of the importance of honing our ability to engage with historically marginalized
or less-involved families and students, along with learning the art of reestablishing
relationships with families. With this essential groundwork part in place, you will now shift
from theoretical foundations to practical implementation. In this lesson, the focus turns to
family engagement within our state, South Carolina. You will closely examine the state’s Family
Engagement K–12 Framework and its strategies that serve as the foundation for effective family
engagement plans. Through exploring these practical approaches, the aim is to bridge theory
with action, equipping you with actionable insights to elevate family engagement in ways that
truly matter.
Before starting this lesson, a gentle reminder that family engagement, in all of its diffculties
and intricacies, is one of the most worthwhile efforts we can make as educators and change-
makers in our school systems. 
Let this following quote from the National Parent Teacher Association Standards for
Parent/Family Involvement (2010, p.17) be a reminder as you continue on this lesson.
"Effectively engaging parents and families in the education of their
