"Effectively engaging parents and families in the education of their
children has the potential to be far more transformational than any other
type of education reform.” 
National Parent Teacher Association Standards for Parent/Family Involvement

Family Engagement in South Carolina
South Carolina Family Engagement K–12 Framework
As you may recall from Core MTSS Practices, there is legislation in place to support family
engagement —Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and the Individuals with Disabilities in
Education Act (IDEA). 
In addition, South Carolina has speciﬁc legislation that aims to support family and school
engagement. Examples are the SC Code of Laws Title 59, Chapter 28; the South Carolina School
Improvement Council, and the South Carolina Annual Parent Survey. 
See the attached PDFs below for more information.
Every Student Succeeds Act.pdf
Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act.pdf
Family Engagement Supports and Resources- South Carolina.pdf

South Carolina K–12 Framework
One of those supports is the South Carolina Family Engagement K–12 Framework (SC K–12
Framework; 2019). This was developed in line with the Title 59 mandate with help from the
Council of Chief State School Offcers. The purpose of the Framework is to provide action steps
and strategies to ground family engagement policies and practices at each level: state, district,
and school.
There are ﬁve strategies in the SC K-12 Framework that are the anchors for practical family
engagement plans. Let’s brieﬂy look at those now. We will get more in-depth later on!
Think of these as the instruction manuals behind each tool or practical strategy we will use to
build our Tier 1 supports.
Building Relationships –
Mutual trust and respect between schools and families; valuing the diversity of each other; the
ability to communicate clearly and listen actively and share information on students’ academics,
behavior, and positive health and wellbeing.
Communication –
Effectively conveying and understanding information between schools and advocates; two-way
communication that uses multiple strategies to build relationships between schools and families.
Linking Learning Outcomes –
Keeping families knowledgeable about what their students are learning and about their role in
supporting students in achieving goals; providing strong school supports for family engagement
and ensuring that families are aware of them. 
Collaborative Practices –
Staff and families learning with and from each other; viewing each individual through an assets-
based lens; working together and sharing information to achieve outcomes not achievable in
isolation.
Community Partnerships –
Mutual commitments with community organizations (businesses, recreational centers, faith-
based organizations, volunteer groups, healthcare organizations, higher education) that engage
families in ways that are relevant and suitable for everyone involved.
These are the ﬁve overarching strategies that practical steps for elevating family engagement
will fall under. You learned the beneﬁts of family engagement for students, and you’ve already
seen the theories, such as dual capacity building theory, behind this in Core MTSS. We now have
these strategies to guide our thinking and planning.
Moving from theory and ideals to a systematic, intentional integration of families with a
collaborative partnership requires practical strategy and ideas. That is what we are going to
cover next!

Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways
Practical Strategies for Building Relationships
You will notice an overlap between practical plans under each strategy; this is due to the
interlocking nature of these strategies! After all, you can’t build relationships without
communication—and building relationships is where we start!
Before you review practical strategies to elevate family engagement, we want to acknowledge
the work that you are already doing. It can feel, at times, overwhelming or even insulting to
suggest adding on activities that are completed outside of work hours or are simply another
"thing" tacked on to an already over-full plate. 
We hear you! These strategies are not meant to say, "You're not doing enough" or "Add this on
top of everything". These are practical tools you can choose to use in line with the MTSS
framework. 
As you review these tools, know that it might take scheduling creatively, meeting with your
grade-level team, or reaching out to your social worker, school counselor, or School Behavioral
Health Academy coach. You are NOT alone, and we are here for you! 

Building Relationships
Relationships are built as much on tiny, day-to-day interactions as they are on set-aside,
planned events, and meetings. Strategies to build relationships require both! Let’s look at the
day-to-day moments ﬁrst. This includes both body language and verbal affrmation. While
these strategies may seem mundane or even obvious, they are important because we experience
them in every relationship.
Day-to-Day –
-Smile when you see parents and caregivers.
-Learn parents' and caregivers' names! Use this opportunity to connect with students. Ask
them what their parents prefer to be called or what most people call their parents— by their
ﬁrst name? Last? If their name is associated with a title, such as Dr. or Reverend, do they
prefer that? It is best to assume formality until the family advises otherwise.
-Smile at the student while talking to their caregivers so that the child knows that they are
included and valued in the conversation.
-Celebrate parents and caregivers. Thank them for what they do. This can be in a day-to-day
interaction verbally when they’re picking their student up or dropping them off, or more
intentionally, such as in a section printed in the school newspaper or an email.

Intentional ways to build relationships aren't just meetings, formal or informal. This is where
communication overlaps: intentional ways of building relationships include what you say and
how. You'll see examples of settings, statements, and more in the next section!
Intentional Settings –
1) During one of your ﬁrst meetings, declare your intentions to the caregiver or parent. For
example, say, "I want to partner with you," or "I look forward to working alongside you,"
and so forth. Use language that communicates an equal partnership and collaboration
between you and the family for the student. 
2) If the family speaks another language as their primary language, ﬁnd an interpreter or staff
member who is bilingual. 
3) Ask questions about the student outside of school, such as what their favorite activity is, or
who other important people are in their lives. You’re showing the family that you care about
their student beyond what occurs within school walls. 
4) Explain the rationale behind what you’re doing. Remember, we don't know what we don't
know. Instead of referencing what you’re doing with educational system jargon or
acronyms, explain what you're doing and why you're doing it using references to their
speciﬁc student.
5) Share every success. Let families know how their students are doing and what they’re doing
well in, academically, behaviorally, and in their positive health and wellbeing. 
6) Give parents opportunities to volunteer in class and in school. Schools have open-door
policies where families can come observe their child’s class; make sure parents know about
this! You can use online calendars where weekly or monthly slots are available for meeting
with the teacher, visiting school, etc. 
7) Hold parent meetings early in the school year, within the ﬁrst month if possible. Use an
online signup sheet so families can ﬁnd a time that works for their schedules. During these
meetings, focus on personal connections such as shared backgrounds, hobbies, and hopes
for the student. Explain plans for communication and ask for family communication
preferences and expectations. 
You are now going to zoom in on one intentional setting in particular: home visits.
While schools may not frequently engage in home visits as a common practice, it's
important to be mindful that the concept of home visits is a valuable approach to family
engagement. Despite its limited prevalence, understanding the potential beneffts and
strategies linked with home visits can broaden your perspective on fostering stronger
connections between educators and families.

Home Visits
You are going to walk through two different scenarios of how home visits can go. Let's start
with Elizabeth, a 3rd grade teacher, meeting Elena, the mother of her student Yasmine.
 Start of Scenario
Home Visits: Friend or Foe?
Elizabeth has never met Yasmine's mom before. She's in the
apartment complex parking lot getting ready to walk to the
apartment. Let's drop in on Elizabeth and Elena as they get ready.
It's 5:45 PM. School got out a couple hours ago, but I stayed late
to grade so that I wouldn't be too far behind because of this visit.
Meeting these home visit quotas is hard!
My administrator just assumes I know what I'm doing, but I
don't. And all this gas is expensive. Even though I've asked my
colleagues about what to say, I still feel unsure of what to do.
I should probably bring my tote with the resources, pamphlets,
and notes I brought just in case Yasmine's parents have
questions. This is for them, after all, and I hope it helps them
trust us more.
I'll try to make this quick. I don't want to be here, and I am sure
they don't want me here either. They won't mind if we're a bit
brief.
I got back from work 15 minutes ago, and I'm supposed to have
these two teachers in my home? I've barely had time to
straighten up, much less get ready or fix food. I wish we met in
the park.
I feel like a bad hostess. I don't want them to judge me. I saw two
of them get out of the car; do they think they're unsafe here? And
why do they have so much stuff — are they taking notes on this?
Are they going to report on how my house is, what Yasmine's
room looks like? We usually eat dinner at 6:15; what if Yasmine
starts fussing and they think I'm a bad mom?
I feel intimidated and worried. I hope it's fast, but I hope they're
nice and empathetic. I don't know. I've never done this before.
 End of Scenario
You can probably imagine how the rest of that visit went. Both Elizabeth and Elena were
stressed, tired, and didn't know what to expect. They felt unprepared and seemed unsure of the visit's purpose.

Let's now meet Christian, a teacher from the local middle school, visiting Jerome's home to
meet his caregiver, Liam.
Start of Scenario
Home Visits: Friend or Foe?
Christian is on his way to meet Liam and George, the parents of
his student Jerome. Let's see how Christian and George are
getting ready for the visit.
It's 5:45 PM; even though this is later than I usually work, I am
really grateful that my principal made these visits voluntary and
paid for gas. I'm also grateful for the paid training on Saturday.
I wouldn't have thought that they might be concerned that I'm
evaluating their home, or that I have an issue with Jerome. I'm
glad I got the chance to explain in those emails and phone call!
I'll leave the folders in the car just to make it clear that I'm only
here to get to know them better! Jerome told me they usually eat
at 6:30, so I'll leave before then so they have time as a family.
While I am unsure of how this will actually go, I really appreciate
how Christian clarified what the purpose of this visit is and that
we, with Jerome, got to decide if we wanted to do this.
Liam, my partner, and I have really wanted to engage more with
Jerome's new middle school, but we've been really busy with new
jobs and we don't feel super comfortable in school buildings.
Meeting here feels more comfortable for Liam and me, and I
really value that flexibility. Since I know exactly who is coming
and why, I feel less stressed than I did when I first heard about it.
I'm excited for Christian to get to know us better, and for us to
get to know Jerome's teachers. I think this could be the start of an
awesome relationship with the school.
 End of Scenario
Christian's visit to Liam and George was distinctly
different from Elizabeth and Miller's visit to Elena and Marcus.
Why?Was Christian just a better teacher, or
Liam and George "better" parents? As you examine
home visits, you will answer those questions!

Challenges of Home Visits
As you saw with Christian, home visits give educators a way to build relationships with families
outside school and gain insight into family dynamics, culture, and relationships. Research
reveals the value of home visits in improving family-educator relationships (Soule & Curtis,
2021; Stetson et al., 2012), beneﬁtting student outcomes (Sheldon & Jung, 2018; Soule & Curtis,
2021; Wright et al., 2018), and removing certain barriers (e.g., intimidation of school grounds,
transportation issues, childcare; Gulledge, 2021; Hopper, 2020; Jacques & Villegas, 2018).
However, home visits can also be intimidating to families or frightening. This was clear with
Elizabeth and Elena! Educators coming into the home may give families a fear similar to a child
welfare visit or a housing inspection. Having educators or staff visit a family’s most personal
space can feel intrusive, or stressful as social norms dictate a level of hospitality that adds extra
work to a family’s plate. Further, the way educators or staff react in a home setting (e.g.,
nervous, defensive, overly comfortable) can be insulting or off-putting to families. On the
educator side, suggesting that educators add another task that is so time-consuming and
intensive can feel detached from the reality of what teachers are already doing. 
Review these following guidelines to learn more about
conducting family visits, regardless of where they
happen!
IMAGE HERE
Standards for conducting home visits and reminders
"The goal of home visits is to learn from families, not teach
families."
Paulick et al. (2023)
Before moving into communication, let's listen to Marcus Jackson, an executive consultant for
the San Diego County Offce of Education, as he discusses building relationships with families,
provides practical steps, and outlines his own strategy for engaging families, regardless of the
setting!
Marcus beautifully describes the "triangular process" between schools, communities, and
families while giving practical strategies to implement for family engagement. While Marcus
brieﬂy touches on working with diffcult relationships between schools and families, you will
dive into that more thoroughly toward the end of the lesson!

Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways
Practical Strategies for Communication
You’ve most likely noticed the threads of the next key strategy communication already. Let’s
dive deeper into practical ways you can communicate with families to elevate their engagement!
Any house built by a team that cannot communicate with each other is a house destined to fall.
Communication is key for relationships, effectiveness, and simply getting it
done.
The issue with communication between families and schools is not that it cannot happen, but
how it happens.
- Does it provide families with opportunities to share their feedback and
actively participate in the conversation?
- Is it peppered inconsistently throughout weeks and happening only
when a need arises?
- Or is it radio silence for the most part?
This is what Marcus Jackson meant when he talked about talking with parents instead of at
them. Here are key strategies you can use to communicate more effectively with families!
1) Communicate often and in various forms: Consistent, dependable communication is the bedrock of two-way communication. Multiple methods of communication are needed: families value forms such as newsletters, texting, emails, and in-person communication. Communication can occur in groups (e.g., focus groups, parent-teacher conferences, etc.) or individually (e.g., phone calls, home visits, emails).  
2) Make a positive home phone call: Positive home phone calls early or towards the middle of the school year are your opportunity to learn more about the student and their family. It’s important to ensure that your first communication with a family is not over a negative issue, whether a low grade or a behavioral complication. These calls also allow you to share with caregivers your own positive experiences with the student. If you have a smaller classroom, you may be able to make phone calls to every student’s family. If that is not feasible, you can make positive phone calls to families of students who seem to be struggling, are new, or are receiving Tier 2 or Tier 3 supports. 
3) Have a translator: Have a translator: According to the South Carolina Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office, 7.3% of South Carolinian families speak a language other than English in the home. While that may seem like a small percentage, that’s over 300,000 people! Families that speak a language other than English deserve to be known and seen in ways that work for them. Families who speak languages other than English deserve to be respected and understood. The availability of bilingual staff and translators demonstrates a commitment to an inclusive and welcoming school environment.
4) Use Inclusive language: It is easy to slip into assumptions about family structure or what we expect a student’s family to be like. Yet, we know that many families are not a “typical nuclear” family. Caregivers may be biological or adoptive, married or single, homosexual or heterosexual — and any combination of this! Students may be in foster care, living with grandparents, or have a single parent. Ask open-ended questions to your students about their families to get a better understanding.  

Outside of speciﬁc plans like having a translator or using inclusive language, much of
communication comes down to simply being a conversationalist. Watch Celeste Headlee, a
journalist and radio show-host, go over ten ways to have a better conversation during a 2016
TED Talk in Savannah, Georgia.
Celeste Headlee: 10 ways to have a better conversation | TED
You just listened to Celeste Headlee offering invaluable insights into the art of conversation. Her
practical tips and thoughtful advice serve as a guide to enhancing our everyday interactions.
These principles help you cultivate more meaningful connections, foster understanding, and
bridge divides in a world where effective communication is more crucial than ever.
Celeste Headlee's tips are great for in-person communication, and some of them apply to
communicating through technology. Given how ubiquitous technology is, you are going to
dedicate more time to examining communication through technology with families.

Communicating Through Technology
While not accessible to or preferable for every family, technology-based communication is a
staple in many schools and provides a level of effectiveness and ease for communicating.
Technology can be used to contact parents at a time when they’re accessible but not on school
grounds and can be used in a variety of methods: short emails, newsletters, website updates,
texts, calls, and more. At the beginning of the school year, consider creating and sharing a brief,
informal online survey where families can share a bit about themselves as well as select their
preferred method of communication and speciﬁc times of day they’re available! 
Research shows that caregivers are especially interested in technology-based communication
that allows them to respond or give feedback instead of simply reading what the educator has to
say (Ketly & Waydashi, 2022). This further creates a feeling of equitable partnership. There are a
few apps and processes used for communication in schools that you may be familiar with
already. Let’s brieﬂy look at those now to boost your communication with families online!
1) REMIND APP:This is an app for educators to text students and families with reminders, motivational messages,
and homework updates. It allows the educator to set offce hours so parents can connect with the
educator and discuss what’s on their mind. This is a two-way app; families can send the educator
voice notes and permission slips as well! 
2) CLASROOM WEBSITE: Educators can put every resource required for their classroom in one place for families and
students to easily access; here, educators can post class updates, photos, and reminders. A
classroom website weeds out the overwhelming number of emails with attachments being sent.
There are multiple different website building tools:
-Wix
-WordPress
-HubSpot Drag-and-Drop Website Builder
-Mozello
-Weebly
These are free, and there are plenty of others that you can pay to get help setting up a website! If
you have a high school classroom, creating or editing a classroom website can be an assignment!
3) BLOOMZ APP: Bloomz is a hybrid between a messaging app and a classroom website! Parents connect to the
educator as well as to other parents. Class updates allow for video and photo sharing, and the
calendar has itemized events that link to other pages. Educators can send messages about student
timelines and behavior, and the app has more of a social networking feel because parents can like
and respond to statuses. 
4) SLIDESHOW: This is a strategy that works best with families of younger students. With the families’ permission,
you can take pictures during class and create little slideshows to send to parents throughout the
year to see what their students are learning and doing! Parents can also make one for educators to
show the student’s life outside of school. 
Given that the majority of family and school communication comes from schools to families, it
is important to respond promptly to communication from families. Whether your own
availability is outlined in the class's syllabus, or communicated one-on-one, dedicate time in
your schedule to respond to families. One principal set up a system with his secretary where he
would respond to every phone call from a parent by the end of the day (Leo et al., 2019). When
parents ﬁrst call, the secretary would inform them that the principal would call them back after
3 PM. Plans like these increase trust between families and schools when they are followed
through with consistency!
As you move forward into the next strategy, keep this following quote in mind when you reﬂect
on communication!
“The two words 'information' and 'communication' are often used
interchangeably, but they signify quite different things:
Information is giving out; communication is getting through.”
- Sydney J. Harris, American Journalist

Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways
Practical Strategies for Linking Families to Learning Outcomes
Families need to know their role in their student’s success. Bringing families into the
educational process and academic career of their students takes time. In many ways, the
process of including families is less deﬁned than strategies to build relationships or
communicate because learning outcomes are so diverse.
Let’s listen to Dr. Karen Mapp, the creator of the Dual Capacity Building Framework for Family-
School Partnerships that you may have learned about already if you took the Core MTSS
Practices. In this clip, Dr. Mapp gives a talk at the Harvard Graduate School of Education on the
purpose of linking families to learning.
VIDEO HERE
Dr. Mapp clearly laid out the value of linking families to learning outcomes. And, as you already
know, you’ll encounter students with different learning outcomes in the same class, and
families with their own expectations and desires for a student that may or may not align with
yours! You'll likely encounter more parents than not who don’t know how to engage with their
student’s learning outcomes.
Use the following tips to link families to their student's
learning outcomes!
Tip 1: Let Parents Know How They Can Help
Tell parents about volunteering opportunities or let them know they can observe their
child’s class at any time! Give speciﬁc feedback to parents on how they can help their
students. This includes offering parents course-speciﬁc content, educational videos, and
other resources they can use to brush up on a topic they may not have touched on in years. 
Tip 2: Be Specific
VIDEO HERE
This is a video of an academic parent-teacher team meeting, a model for family engagement
created by Maria C. Paredes, where the ﬁrst-grade teacher provides speciﬁc tools families
can use to help their students at home with homework.
Here are more speciﬁc examples. “You can help Colby with his math homework by asking
him to explain how he reached his solution," or "You can help Jessica with her English
homework by having her read aloud what she’s written!”
Speciﬁc instructions are helpful for families of young students and older students alike.
Families may not able to explain sounding out consonants, the War of 1812, or algebraic
division without a refresher themselves. Through the parent’s preferred method of
communication, include an, "Ask Me About..." In this section, you can describe a few of the
topics being covered in class, especially topics students may ﬁnd challenging. This will equip
families to support continued learning outside the school. Include real-world connections,
like connecting the value of learning history to the present and practical usages of math in
day-to-day life.
Tip 3: Receive Feedback from Families on Homework
For younger students, having a parent helping them with homework is beneﬁcial if the
parents are positive about engaging with the material. Parents are more likely to be positive if
the work is not extremely long or taxing (Bachman et al., 2021). While you are the expert as a
teacher, families are able to provide valuable feedback on how the material is being processed
and understood by their children. By seeking feedback on assignments, you communicate to
families that you value their engagement with the material. After all, they cannot give input
on an assignment if they have not engaged with it in the ﬁrst place. 
Tip 4: Actively Work to Remove Obstacles that Prevent Families from Engaging
Families want to join their students. However, there are signiﬁcant barriers that prevent
families from coming to school. Events typically occur during evenings, when families would
be returning from or going to work, feeding children, or watching younger and older
children. Remove barriers by offering food and drinks to families at events and ensuring that
food is available for people with certain diet restrictions. Many families have more than one
child; arrange childcare by having educators available to supervise play or host students at
the same time as family workshops or meetings. Travel can be expensive— offer gas gift
cards! 
Ultimately, you cannot fully connect each family to their student’s learning outcomes on your
own. You also can’t be an expert on everything, and you shouldn’t be!
What you need to be is a broker of resources. Have resources ready when parents come to you
for help regarding their student—tutors, school counselors, other staff who may be more
qualiﬁed, programs, and even other families. Here are a few you can use! We've provided South
Carolina's K-12 Framework and the South Carolina Proﬁle of a Graduate.
SCDE Family Engagement K-12 Framework.pdf
329 KB
Proffle of the South Carolina Graduate.pdf
195.3 KB
You also have access to Dr. Karen Mapp's video and the Academic Parent Teacher Team video!

Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways
Practical Strategies for Collaborative Practices
Vanilla Ice may have said it best, "Collaborate and Listen!"
Collaboration is active engagement with one another, built on trust, open communication, and
mutual respect. It involves shared responsibility for student outcomes and active participation
by both families and schools in meeting those outcomes. Griffths et al. (2021) deﬁnes shared
responsibility and active participation in the educational context as:
- Shared Responsibility: each member contributes their own expertise and has a
unique role in determining solutions and strategies. In shared responsibility,
ownership is collective, roles are clear, and responsibilities are outlined.
- Active Participation: Each member takes responsibility for their role and contributes
resources. 
Together, shared responsibility and active participation create shared decision-making: teams
systematically take input from all members before making a decision.
School leaders support initiatives to bring families, faculty, and staff together so they can learn
from each other. Both families and schools are viewed through an asset-based lens: What do
you bring to the table? What does that caregiver bring to the table? When both parties are viewed
through an asset-based lens, the "I tell, you do" moves towards “we” statements. 
Let’s look at four examples of schools that collaborated with families to elevate family
engagement. 
Principal Zavala –
On a Saturday, Principal Zavala, the principal of a primarily immigrant, Latino/a and low-
achieving school, hosted a school-sponsored event for families. Caregivers brought their children
to school where educators watched them through supervised sports or playing. While the
children were supervised, caregivers picked two out of ﬁfteen workshops on strengthening
family dynamics and ﬁnancial growth. The intentionality of the event was seen in the bilingual or
Spanish-speaking educators and staff who greeted the caregivers, and the food provided, pan
dulce (sweet rolls), was culturally signiﬁcant.
Principal Zavala wanted to elevate family engagement in ways that were more than just
checking-off boxes but were important to the families and relevant to the community. Outside of
the Saturday workshops, Principal Zavala and the educators, faculty, and staff met and reached
out to other organizations and programs in the community that would beneﬁt their families,
such as the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund or Lea Conmigo (Read With
Me). 
Principal Perez –
Principal Perez is an elementary school principal in a working-class neighborhood. The school's
resources were used to support a family engagement program called Parents as Authors where
school parents write a book about their family to share with their students. The program ran over
several months. Workshops staffed by educators included brainstorming ideas, sentence-
starters, editing, and ultimately, presenting their stories to their children. The value of this
approach was that it connected not just the families to the school and vice versa but families to
other families within the community. Principal Perez said that learning about families'
backgrounds, their experiences with education, and their hope for their students gave school
staff and educators a deeper understanding and empowered them to more strongly connect with
the families.
Principal Franco –
Principal Franco, or “Principal Learner,” as the sign on his door said, set up monthly Saturday
workshops at the school in addition to an annual parent conference. At the workshops, open-
ended questions served as the topics. For example, one topic was: "Why education is important to
me." Caregivers and staff alike share their experiences and thoughts in a guided discussion. These
meetings were important because they took a school and family connection that is typically
fragmented and turned into a "village." Aside from these workshops, Principal Franco moved
traditional “home visits” into a classroom with a group of parents to ease the stress families may
feel having educators in the home. The hope with these visits was that it would do more for
parental engagement than the traditional PTA meetings that had not succeeded in the past. 
Assistant Principal Young –
Assistant Principal Young knew that families in the community were suspicious of schools due to
previous discrimination and mistrust. Home visits were organized to meet the families where
they were. Visits took place over months and were on a voluntary basis. These visits were focused
on getting to know families and were strictly positive. As the Assistant Principal noted, engaging
with families requires leadership involvement or the efforts will fade out. Assistant Principal
Young saw a “snowball” effect with the families and staff involved in home visits; they were more
likely to engage in other activities, such as the Homework Club! The root of desiring and
structuring family engagement was based on Assistant Principal Young’s ﬁrm belief that families
are natural partners in a collective responsibility for children.

Implementing Collaborative Family Engagement Initiatives in Your School
The examples provided above offer valuable insights into effective strategies for collaborating
with families to enhance family engagement in schools. Indeed, you can use these examples to
implement similar initiatives in your own school. Here are a few key steps.
- Start by adopting an asset-based approach, recognizing the strengths families and
schools bring to the table.
- Host inclusive events that cater to your community's needs, fostering open
communication and mutual understanding.
- Utilize resources creatively, involving families in projects like the "Parents as
Authors" initiative to deepen connections.
- Offer diverse points of engagement such as workshops and meetings, addressing
potential barriers with solutions like childcare and transportation assistance.
- Engage school leaders and educators, creating a shared sense of responsibility.
- Leverage community resources to expand support networks, and prioritize building
trust and positive relationships.
By adapting these strategies to your particular context, you can establish collaborative practices
that enhance student success through meaningful family engagement.

Practical Strategies for Community Partnerships
Effective Approaches for Building School and Community
Connections
A key value of community partnerships is that they extend learning activities outside of the
school walls. Schools can network with community organizations, faith-based institutions,
businesses, libraries, or tutoring programs. Working with and within communities also moves
what can be an intimidating school environment to a more neutral or positive one. Let’s brieﬂy
look at the different strategies used for starting community partnerships.

Beginning a New Community Partnership: When identifying community organizations as possible school partners, a helpful place to
start is looking at the organization's values. You want the community partnerships to reﬂect
the values of the school and its families; values that establish and maintain continuity for
school staff, families, and students. 
You’ll cover expectations and values later in this course, but for now, look at the following
two examples of organizations you may consider for partnership: Coca-Cola® and Chick-
ﬁl-A®. The values of Coca-Cola® include leadership, collaboration, integrity, accountability,
passion, diversity, and quality. The values of Chick-ﬁl-A® are, "We're here to serve, we're
better together, we are purpose driven, and we pursue what's next."
Informal Beginnings: As simple as it sounds, community partnerships can start with an email or a phone call. If
you want to partner with a local restaurant, food bank, or faith-based institution, you can
most likely ﬁnd a contact person on their website with a phone number or email. Leverage
the connections you already have within your school. Ask: “What restaurants do you
frequent? Are there charity organizations where you volunteer?” If your school has a social
worker, given the nature of their job, they may know organizations to consider as partners. A
simple greeting and inquiry about openness to partnerships, or a conversation the next time
you stop by, can be the starting point for future collaboration between school and
community organizations and their leaders.
Formal Beginnings: If you don't have a relationship with an organization and want to reach out, try sending or
emailing a letter. Check out the templates below as an example (Riffel, 2016).
Here are the templates by Riffel (2016) combined in a
PDF. This resource includes letter templates and
example activities.
Community Involvement In Positive Behavior Support.pdf
337.6 KB
The second letter template (page 5) from Dr. Riffel is a perfect bridge to maintaining community
relationships. Maintaining community partnerships often looks like repeating events annually
(e.g., Christmas Toy Drives every December), systematic student/teacher discounts from
schools in a district at a local chain, or an after-school program held at faith-based or
recreational centers around the school. The theme in all of these is consistency and time.
Often, school psychologists and/or social workers in your schools will have examples of
maintained school-community partnerships or know of community organizations to join.
Given how these groups may move around within a district, have them create an Excel
spreadsheet with the contact information for community partners, both established and ones
hoped for, that your school can hold onto even if the school psychologist or counselor leaves! 
The template below is a spreadsheet to use when
beginning your outreach to community partners.
Community Partnership Template.xlsx
8.6 KB
Overall, community partnerships offer a valuable avenue for extending learning experiences
beyond the school building. Collaborating with community organizations, faith-based
institutions, businesses, libraries, and other entities not only enriches educational
opportunities but also contributes to creating a more welcoming and positive learning
environment. Through aligning with shared values, schools can establish partnerships that
resonate with their staff, families, and students, fostering continuity and mutual
understanding. Initiating community partnerships can take various forms, ranging from
informal connections through emails or phone calls to more formal approaches such as
sending introductory letters. Leveraging existing relationships, school personnel, such as
social workers, can play a pivotal role in identifying potential partners and initiating
conversations. These partnerships can then evolve into sustained relationships, marked by
consistent events and interactions that beneﬁt both schools and the broader community.
Through careful maintenance and organization of contact information, schools can ensure the
longevity of these valuable connections and continue to reap the beneﬁts of collaborative
community engagement.

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- South Carolina K-12 Framework provides ﬁve guiding strategies to structure family
engagement efforts around building relationships, communication, linking families
to learning outcomes, collaborative practices, and community partnerships. 
- Relationships develop from both daily interactions and planned events. Effective
relationship-building involves a combination of these aspects, beginning with
everyday moments that include body language and verbal affrmation. Despite their
apparent simplicity, these strategies hold signiﬁcance due to their universal
presence in all relationships.
- Effective communication with families can be in various forms communication
including positive home phone calls, inclusive language, and technology-based
communication.
-Involving families in their student's education is indeed essential. Conveying
speciﬁc ways parents can help, offering feedback channels on homework,
overcoming engagement obstacles, and acting as a resource broker are all practical
tips to strengthen family-school partnerships.
- Collaboration is a foundation for effective family engagement, detailing shared
responsibility, active participation, and shared decision-making.
- Community partnerships extend beyond the school building through collaborations
with diverse organizations, aligning shared values, and fostering a positive
environment. These relationships evolve into sustained interactions, beneﬁting
education and the community, with organized contact information ensuring
ongoing engagement.





*****
Building the Foundation with Tier 1- 1.2
School Climate and Safety Enhancement
Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
School Climate and Safety Enhancement
Outcomes:
1. Describe school climate and analyze factors inﬂuencing school climate including a
speciﬁc focus on school safety
2. Consider bullying and its impact on overall school climate and safety
3. Apply the critical features of the MTSS framework to enhance school climate and safety
4. Emphasize proven best practices for fostering a positive school climate and enhancing
safety 

What is School Climate?
The Pattern of how a School Functions and Feels
Image of a tree: side with lush leaves and green grass vs. side with a leaﬂess tree in
the desert sun
What are some ideas that come to mind when you hear the word climate? You might think of the
weather outside, and whether it’s hot or cold, sunny or rainy, calm or stormy. Whatever the
weather is, it can make a signiﬁcant difference in how you feel. You might need sunscreen or an
umbrella, a jacket or short sleeves, or you may not want to go outside at all. A climate is the
long-term representation of weather patterns, where individual days may display short-term
weather variations, but the overall climate reﬂects the typical conditions over an extended
period of time.
School climate is an overarching concept that describes the character and quality of a school.
The climate of a school signiﬁcantly impacts the experience of anyone entering the building,
either positively or negatively.
School climate includes the norms, attitudes, and beliefs of the school community, the way that
people are treated and treat others, the feeling within and surrounding the school, and the way
the school is perceived.  Like with the weather outside, each day may vary, but climate describes
a school's patterns over time and in general.

The Key Elements Contributing to School Climate
According to the Safe and Supportive Schools Model, school climate is the synthesis of three
factors:
- environment
- engagement
- safety
As demonstrated in the image, each of these elements overlaps to create an atmosphere that
profoundly inﬂuences academic achievement, behavioral choices, and the overall learning
experience.
Let’s explore each one.  
IMAGE HERE
A Venn Diagram of the three components of school climate

Environment
The environment is the broader context and circumstances in which learning takes place in a
school. The environment includes more than just the physical surroundings and has many
components. Flip through the ﬂashcards below to learn more details about what makes up a
school's environment.
Phyiscial Envioronment: The school building is the physical
environment, including the quality and functioning of the facilities,
level of cleanliness, ambiance, and how the school is furnished and
decorated.
Instructional Environment: The classroom environment includes the quality and rigor of
instruction, teacher attitudes, academic support, and the use of
evidence-based practices in the classroom.  
Physical Health: This refers to the amount that the environment contributes to
physical health. This contribution could be through encouraging and
educating students about nutrition, providing access to health
education, and providing access to sports, recess, and physical education.
Mental Health: This refers to how the environment supports mental health. The level of
awareness, stigma, and mental health literacy (MHL) programming
that schools support can all contribute to an environment that
promotes positive mental health.
Discipline:   This refers to the expectations and behavior management practices in
the school. Effective, positive behavior management strategies can contribute to a positive school
climate where students respect each other and follow school expectations. 

Engagement
Engagement within a school community refers to the level of participation and collaboration of
all school stakeholders, including educators, students, and the broader community. High levels
of engagement indicate that school community members feel comfortable, accepted, and valued
in the community. Building engagement involves the following: 
Cultural & Linguistic Comeptence: All backgrounds and identities are respected and valued. School staff are aware of their own identities and can relate to others from various backgrounds. If you have taken the Core MTSS course you know all about cultural and linguistic competence! If you haven't, go check out that course where there's a whole lesson dedicated to it! 
Relationship: Relationships between students, educators, and the community are nurtured. Positive relationships increase feelings of school connectedness and enable stronger academic progress for students. This greater connectedness increases the likelihood that families and communities will be involved.
School Participation: School participation includes how often and in what capacity community members participate. For students, this might look like attendance and participation in the classroom. For families and community members, this might look like attending school events, serving on leadership teams, volunteering, and other activities.   


Safety
School safety is essential to a positive school climate. School safety is about creating an
environment where students, teachers, and school staff are safe and free from physical or
emotional harm, whether this is from bullying, harassment, crime, or any other threat. Feeling
safe in the school environment makes students more willing to attend, participate, and build
positive relationships. When we talk about school safety, we don’t emphasize only physical
safety and keeping the school grounds free of violence. School safety also includes protecting
the social environment and relationships. We will take a much deeper dive into safety shortly,
for now, here is a look at the different facets of school safety. Flip through the ﬂashcards below.
Physical Saftey: This is what often comes to mind when thinking about safety: it
means being free from threats of violence, crime, natural disasters, diseases, or other physical harm. 
Emotional Saftey: This refers to feeling safe and secure in expressing and managing emotions at school. Students in emotionally safe climates feel that they belong, can express themselves, and have a network of support. Positive health and wellbeing (PHW) are important components for maintaining emotional safety. You will learn more about  PHW in the next lesson entitled “Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations.”
Bullying & Cyberbullying: Bullying is another concern that many students face in the school setting that can be disruptive to physical and emotional safety and greatly impact mental health. For more information about bullying, keep going with this lesson!   
Substance Abuse: Safety from substance abuse protects students from harm relating to alcohol, tobacco, drugs, or other substances. Schools with safety from substance abuse promote healthy habits and reduce or eliminate student exposure to harmful substances.  
Emergency Readiness & Management: his refers to safety from emergencies relating to violence, natural disasters, accidents, or epidemics. This level of safety involves having and acting on plans as needed. This includes the stages of prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery.

By understanding the importance of environment, engagement, and safety, educators can
cultivate a conducive atmosphere for learning and personal growth. Let's now delve deeper into
how these key school climate elements affect not just student academic success, but also
behavior and the mental well-being of all within the school community.

Considering the Far-Reaching Impact of School Climate
School climate is an extensive concept that ripples through every corner of the educational
landscape. As mentioned earlier, school climate inﬂuences student academic performance and
also students' social interactions and responses to disciplinary measures. Click through these
topics to understand how climate is profoundly connected to student outcomes.
Academics  –
Grades/Test Scores: School climate impacts a student’s learning. A positive school climate can
help students feel supported, motivated, and capable. Feeling safe and comfortable allows
students to focus on learning without other concerns taking precedence, ultimately impacting
grades and test scores. On the other hand, in a negative school climate, students may lack a sense
of belonging, feel unmotivated to participate in school activities, or be concerned about their
safety, all of which detract from learning.  
Attendance: Students are more likely to attend school when they feel safe, comfortable, and
supported. In a survey of youth, 15% of students reported skipping school because of feeling
unsafe within the past school year (CDC, 2019). Fostering a positive school climate and school
safety can help increase attendance and reduce the number of students who are chronically
absent. For a more in-depth look at the relationship between school climate and student
absenteeism download this article from the Journal of School Psychology, entitledHow School
Climate Relates to Chronic Absence: A Multi-level Latent Proﬁle Analysis.
Graduation Rate: Students who feel unwelcome and unsupported are less likely to want to
participate meaningfully in classes and academic work, increasing the likelihood of falling behind
academically. Students who miss more school because of a negative environment are also more
likely to fall behind academically and ultimately drop out (National Institutes of Health, 2020).
Fostering a safe and supportive school climate makes students more likely to attend school and
more likely to engage effectively with the school environment.   

Behavior and Discipline –
Behavior both reﬂects and inﬂuences school climate. In a positive school climate, students are
more likely to want to follow rules, to feel respected and supported, and to treat others with
respect. On the other hand, a negative school climate can also inﬂuence behavior and vice versa.
In a school with many negative behaviors, like violence and bullying, students and educators are
less likely to feel safe and comfortable.  
Discipline can also impact school climate. A positive and effective discipline system sets up clear
expectations for students and teachers, supports an environment where all students feel that they
belong, and cultivates respect between teachers and students. An ineffective discipline system can
lead to a higher rate of behavior problems, which can make students feel uncomfortable or
unsafe, distract attention away from learning, and contribute to teacher dissatisfaction and
burnout.  
School discipline systems may be overly strict, harsh, or punitive, which can contribute to
students' negative feelings, such as low self-esteem or feeling as though they don't belong. One
way that this can happen is through exclusionary discipline. Exclusionary discipline is any
discipline that removes students from the school environment, such as suspensions and
expulsions. Overuse of exclusionary discipline can lead to students feeling disconnected from and
unwelcome in the school environment. Use of this type of discipline can also increase the
likelihood of future behavior problems. Students from minoritized backgrounds are also more
likely to receive exclusionary discipline, contributing to disproportionality.
For more information on responding to student behavior, review "Creating and Implementing
Expectations" later in this course.

School climate can have an impact on student mental
health and the overall wellbeing of the school community
A positive school climate can help support positive mental health outcomes for students. On the
other hand, the incidence of mental health concerns directly correlates to a negative school
climate. For example, a school climate riddled with high rates of bullying can increase the
likelihood of students experiencing depression, anxiety, or substance use.  
Additionally, a school environment that lacks awareness and understanding of mental health
and mental health concerns may perpetuate misconceptions and biases surrounding
individuals experiencing mental health issues. School-wide programming that serves to reduce
stigma and increase mental health literacy can help provide a safer space for students in the
school, promote better self-esteem for students with mental health concerns, and increase
help-seeking behaviors.  

Supporting student mental health needs through climate
and safety MTSS practices
As you may already know from experience, comprehensive school mental health systems
nurture positive student outcomes. These systems offer a range of supports and services at
different levels to help improve school climate, foster social and emotional development,
enhance mental health and overall wellbeing, and contribute to a decrease in the prevalence and
intensity of mental health concerns.
Some of the most effective supports are
- using strength-based approaches
- working together with students and their parents/caregivers
- integrating MTSS practices that are evidenced-based, rely on data, and involve continuous
evaluation and quality improvement. 
Let’s further explore these key practices by examining the graphic below that illustrates how
these mental health supports address the critical needs for enhancing school climate and
promoting school safety.
IMAGE HERE
A graphic illustrating core components for supporting student mental health needs
School climate also inffuences educators, administrators, and other school staff,
shaping their experiences, attitudes, and effectiveness. Characteristics of a negative
school climate can contribute to stress and burnout for the educators in the school,
which can ultimately lead to reduced job satisfaction and high rates of turnover. A
positive school climate empowers educators, fosters a community of inclusion and
respect, and reduces stress. The upcoming lesson Wellness Enhancement for School
Staff will delve into educator burnout, stress issues, and wellness promotion
strategies targeting adults within the school building.

A Closer Look at School Safety
Understanding how School Climate and Safety are Interconnected
As mentioned earlier in the lesson, school climate and school safety share an intricate
relationship. Where the climate is the pattern over time,school safety is like the daily
weather: it is dynamic and can change rapidly. Just like a sunny day can turn stormy, even a safe
school environment can encounter safety concerns, such as violence. Thankfully, just like
checking and preparing for weather changes, schools can also prepare for potential safety
threats by implementing safety measures.
Preparing for the weather and assuring a safe school environment both involve being proactive
and taking necessary steps to reduce risk. Step one? Understand why students may be engaging
in school violence. Read on.

Uncovering Risks and Cultivating Resilience
Risk and protective factors help explain why a problem exists and why certain individuals or
groups are more or less likely to become victims of violence or become involved in violence.
Let’s begin with the risks.
Factors that can contribute to incidents of school
violence
You may recall from other lessons that risk factors are associated with
higher negative outcomes.The chart below examines in more detail a
combination of individual, relationship, community, and societal factors
that contribute to the risk of youth violence.
TABLE HERE
Table illustrating risk factors for school violence
It's important to note that not everyone exposed to these risk factors will engage in violent
behavior, however a complex interplay of the various risk factors can contribute to increased
chances of such incidents occurring. It is important for school administration, educators, and
all school staff to understand the possible risk factors that increase the likelihood of school
violence. With this knowledge, schools can improve the ability to detect problems, intervene
early, and minimize the chances of serious violence. 
Let's watch a video provided by the CDC to learn more
about what can put individuals at risk for violence and
what things can act as a protective buffer.
Moving Forward
Moving Forward
As can be seen from the video, a combination of experiences can contribute to school violence.
The risk of experiencing or participating in violence can either be increased or decreased
depending on the positive or negative factors in an individual's life.
Protective factors and measures to foster a safe school
environment
Now that we have discussed how exposure to violence and other risk factors can signiﬁcantly
impact a student's behavior and well-being let's examine certain protective factors that play a
role in enhancing resilience and reducing the likelihood of a student engaging in violence at
school.
TABLE HERE
Table illustrating protective factors that serve to minimize school violence
When students feel connected to their school, engaged in meaningful activities, and supported
by family, friends, and educators, they are less likely to resort to violence. A positive school
environment fosters a sense of purpose and promotes prosocial behaviors.

Resources for Enhancing School Safety
While we cannot guarantee a violent incident will never
occur at our school or in our community, there are
measures we can take to reduce the probability.
Megan Cave, 2018-PBISApps Marketing and Communication
SchoolSafety.gov was created by the federal government to empower districts, schools, and
parents with tools to improve safety and security. The website provides a one-stop-shop for
school safety resources and information. School districts can ﬁnd actionable
recommendations, guidance, training, events, and funding opportunities on a range of school
safety issues. Click and download the resources below for more information.
SCHOOLSAFETY
IMAGE HERE


Taking Immediate Action
Being Prepared for on-the-spot Responses to Crisis
Preparedness is essential for educators to effectively respond to immediate student crises or
school violence. In the event of such incidents, quick and informed actions can mitigate harm,
ensure safety, and provide necessary support. Administrators, educators, and staff need
training to recognize warning signs, establish communication protocols, and implement crisis
response plans. This readiness empowers them to swiftly intervene, provide aid, and collaborate
with emergency services, ultimately minimizing the impact of crises on students and
promoting a secure learning environment.

Averting School Violence
School violence refers to any form of physical, emotional, or psychological harm inﬂicted upon
students, educators, or staff members within the school setting. School violence encompasses a
range of aggressive behaviors that compromise the safety, wellbeing, and conducive learning
atmosphere of schools. Instances of school violence can manifest in various ways, such as
physical ﬁghts between students, bullying and harassment, verbal abuse, cyberbullying
through online platforms, and even more severe incidents like ﬁghts, weapon possession, or
acts of vandalism. The scope of school violence extends beyond physical harm, encompassing
emotional and psychological abuse, which can include social exclusion, spreading rumors, and
intimidation. These acts not only jeopardize individual safety but also impede the overall
educational experience for everyone involved. 
The possibilities of averting school violence are promising when approached through proactive
strategies. For example, fostering strong connections between students, teachers, and
parents/caregivers, through open communication channels can create supportive networks
that can identify and address potential issues before they escalate.
Insights gained from extensive research shed light on the effectiveness of preventive measures.
Between 1999 and 2017, the Averted School Violence Database, established to enhance the
understanding of averted and completed school attacks, identiﬁed 51 instances that were
prevented (Daniels, 2019). Although these ﬁndings only provide a preliminary overview, they
offer valuable suggestions and recommendations into the dynamics of averting school violence.
As you explore these recommendations below, always remember that having knowledge of
these averted attacks will inﬂuence our next action steps in reducing the likelihood of school
violence happening. Let’s examine these recommendations.
- Prepare for possible school-based crises: Law enforcement can prepare by being actively involved in planning emergency operations, developing
command communication structures with first responders, and clarifying roles and responsibilities in
reunification protocols.
- Develop relationships: Form relationships between law enforcement, school personnel (including school staff such as custodians
and cafeteria employees), and—most importantly—students.
- Know and work to improve the school’s climate: It is imperative that school staff are aware of the climate of the school and pay attention when students are singled out for bullying. They need to respond immediately and appropriately to this behavior.
- Know the physical facility and its important features: Law enforcement and first responders should know the layout of the school property, school emergency operations procedures, and ways to access technology such as cameras.
- Take all reports seriously and assume nothing: School violence can be planned and carried out at any type of school, any school level, and any location.
Apart from these recommendations, please examine the graphic below to visualize ﬁve
strategies to help prevent school violence. Click to enlarge.
Graphic showing strategies to prevent school violence
IMAGE HERE

Responding in the Moment
Effectively responding to behavior is critical in providing a safe school environment. When
crises are about to happen (e.g., someone is beginning to lose control), you need to use safe,
respectful, and non-invasive methods for managing disruptive and assaultive student behavior.
Review the ﬂashcards below for guidance in responding to student misbehavior.
- Deescalating yourself first: Before approaching a crisis situation, deescalate yourself first: remain calm and composed. Don’t run and scream at the student to change the behavior. Instead, walk to the student and calmly address the misbehavior. Be mindful that if you approach the student aggressively, you may also contribute to the escalation of the student.  Our goal is to effectively correct the student and deescalate them. This may be easier said than done, but you can get help from the Nonviolent Crisis Intervention program developed by the Crisis Prevention Institute (CPI). This program offers training that not only teaches staff to respond effectively to the warning signs that someone is beginning to lose control, but also addresses how teachers and staff can deal with their own stress, anxieties, and emotions when confronted with these challenging situations. 
- Asses the situation: Assess the situation: Determine the level of threat to yourself and others and take action to ensure safety. This involves considering factors such as the nature and intensity of behavior, presence of weapons, emotional state, history of similar actions, triggers, environment, communication of threats, physical capacity, and behavior duration. These factors, interconnected and evaluated collectively, guide informed decisions to ensure safety in each situation.
- Crisis Response team: crisis response team: If the situation becomes dangerous, don't hesitate to call for help. In schools, there is a trained team responsible for responding to crises. Have the designated, trained person go into the classroom (or where the incident is happening). Response teams could include administrators, school counselors, and School Resource Officers (SROs).
- Restrain: Crisis Prevention Institute (CPI) also provides restraint training, but only after there is a complete understanding of the risks, dangers, and liabilities of using the techniques. Because of the inherent instabilities involved, restraining should be your last resort in preventing harm and must be used only in emergency situations with an understanding of the risks involved.
- Power Struggle: Power struggle: Power struggles in schools can disrupt the handling of safety concerns. Conflicts among staff about safety strategies can hinder effective action. This can extend to conflicts between adults and students, leading to disruptions. To mitigate this, open communication and collaboration are crucial. Resolving conflicts with empathy and de-escalation strategies helps maintain a safe learning environment. Prioritizing teamwork, respect, and clear communication minimizes conflicts and focuses on student safety and growth.
- Student should know what to expect: Students should know what to expect: If a student is called-out for misbehavior, they should know what to expect. It is also important for the adults in the situation to know what the expectations are to minimize confusion. Routine helps prevent escalation. You will learn more about creating those expectations and communicating them clearly to all students in the next lesson!

It is important to remember that every situation is different and may require a unique response.
The goal should always be to maintain safety and resolve the situation in a calm and effective
manner. Be sure to check out our extremely enlightening and informative lesson on Crisis
Management!
Remember that having caring and nurturing relationships with students is of utmost
signiﬁcance. Many diffcult situations have been prevented because students have opened up to
trusted adults in the school setting.
Keeping schools safe requires multidisciplinary planning and implementation. Comprehensive
school safety and security plans address prevention, response, and recovery from crisis events.
Use the link below to download the "Ten Essential Actions to Improve School Safety" (School
Safety Working Group. 2020., Washington, DC Offce of Community Oriented Policing Services).

Exposing Bullying as a Major Threat to School Safety
Analyzing the Signiﬁcant Impact on Overall School Climate and
Safety
The fact is that in a school with a positive school climate, students are more likely to feel safe
from bullying and less likely to feel the need to engage in bullying behavior. Conversely, in a
school where many students are bullied, students don't feel safe.

What Is Bullying?
Bullying is an extremely signiﬁcant issue impacting school climate and school safety. In a
school where many students are bullied, students feel less safe. In a school with a positive
school climate, students are more likely to feel safe from bullying and less likely to feel the need
to engage in bullying behavior. Bullying is a very common issue in the school setting: around
20% of students nationwide, and 23% of students in South Carolina, have experienced bullying
during grades 9-12 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019). This number is also
higher for students of certain identities. In 9th-12th grade students, around 40% of LGBTQ
students, 30% of girls, and 30% of white students have experienced bullying at school or online,
compared to 19% of boys, 19% of African American students, and 18% of Hispanic students
(Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019).  It is important to note here that while these
statistics are for high school students, bullying is also prevalent (and frequently begins) in
middle schools and elementary schools.
Before learning more about bullying, let’s look at how to deﬁne it. There are many ways that
students may mistreat each other, get into disagreements, or otherwise be harmed—so how do
we know when actions indicate bullying? It is essential to make this distinction because
responses to other types of aggression are different from the responses that are needed to
address bullying. Bullying is deﬁned by the CDC as:  
“Any unwanted aggressive behavior(s) by
another youth or group of youths, who are not
siblings or current dating partners, that involves
an observed or perceived power imbalance, and
is repeated multiple times or is highly likely to be
repeated.”   - CDC, 2021
Let’s unpack this deﬁnition. First, bullying is unwanted aggressive behavior. This could be
behavior that’s mean or hurtful, like name-calling and hitting, or any other aggressive behavior
that results in some type of harm—physically, emotionally, or both.
The next part of the deﬁnition involves an observed or perceived power imbalance. Some things
that may contribute to a power imbalance include an older age, bigger size, higher social status,
popularity, or strength in numbers—a group of students compared to a single student, for
example. In a power imbalance, it is unlikely that having a child being bullied to ask the other
child to stop or apologize will be successful.
The last part of the deﬁnition involves behavior that is repeated multiple times or highly likely to
be repeated. This means that behavior is not a one-time occurrence but happens again and
again.  
This deﬁnition plays out in many different ways. When thinking about bullying, one common
stereotype is the “tough kid” who is bigger than all the other kids, often gets into ﬁghts, steals
other children’s lunch money, and has a tough home life. However, bullying is much more than
this. The CDC identiﬁes ﬁve types of bullying:
- Physical—hitting, kicking, punching 
- Verbal—name-calling or teasing 
- Relational/Social—intentional exclusion, spreading rumors, damaging relationships 
- Damage to property—stealing or breaking another student’s personal belongings 
-  Cyberbullying—online bullying: name calling, posting or commenting  
Just as there are many different forms of bullying, there are also many different reasons
students bully. Understanding this perspective can help us more effectively respond to bullying
behavior.
Here are some common reasons that students may bully others.
- Maintain social status by excluding others or controlling behavior of others
- Experience of family abuse, aggression, or violence
- Family with limited emotional support or low parental involvement
- Prior experiences being bullied
- Low self-esteem and insecurity
- Not understanding or empathizing with the emotions of others
Sometimes students who bully are called “bullies” or students who are bullied are called
“victims.” While these descriptions can be helpful, the label of a “bully” or a “victim” can
cause a child to feel as though their role is set and unchangeable, while this does not have
to be true.
Students who bully can be bullied, students who are bullied can also bully others, and
students are not deffned by either of these roles.  

Effects of Bullying
Regardless of the role being played, bullying has many, sometimes long-lasting, effects.
Students who are bullied, who bully others, and who are bystanders are more likely to
experience:  
- Increased anxiety, depression, self-harm, or substance use 
- Reduced interest in activities
- Increased feelings of isolation or loneliness 
- Increased likelihood of missing or skipping school and/or dropping out 
- Decreased academic performance, including grades and test scores

How to Respond to Bullying
Knowing that bullying can have these negative impacts on students, it is important to have a
plan for how to respond to bullying when it is witnessed. Bystanders, those who witness
bullying, have the potential to impact bullying as it is happening, either positively or negatively.
Bystanders can have various roles: peers, teachers, administrators, friends, family members, or
others. Depending on your role, you may respond differently.  
There are different types of responses to bullying behavior as a bystander. Flip through the
cards below to review how people respond.
- Reinforcers: These bystanders reinforce the bullying behavior. While they may
not be bullying themselves, they may laugh, cheer, or otherwise support the bullying.
- Outsiders: These bystanders see the bullying but do not participate, either by
bullying or being bullied. They also do not help, encourage, or discourage bullying: they only
witness it.
- Assistants: Assistants are like reinforcers but are more directly involved and
actively support bullying.
- Defenders: Defenders witness the bullying incident and take steps to
intervene. They may directly call out the behavior, ask the person
bullying to stop, or otherwise attempt to prevent the bullying from continuing.  

When bystanders intervene, bullying stops within 10 seconds 57% of the
time (stopbullying.gov, 2018). This shows the importance of
interveningin bullying incidents for students, educators, and anyone else
who may witness it.  
While it is important to intervene in bullying incidents, there are also some common reasons
why people may not intervene as listed below (CDC, 2018).   
- Concern about how intervening may impact their social status 
- Fear of retaliation or becoming the target of bullying
- Not knowing that the incident is bullying— they do not have enough information about the situation, or they do not know how to deﬁne bullying 
- Concern that they will not help the situation, or could make the situation worse
- Desire to intervene but not knowing how
Understanding these reasons can help educators and students best determine how to improve
their ability and willingness to respond. For example, if a school ﬁnds that many teachers want
to respond to bullying but do not know how, they can provide training on response strategies.
Having a strong response to bullying can help cultivate a positive school climate where respect
is valued and negative behaviors are discouraged, reducing the frequency of these behaviors and
improving school safety.

Analyzing the effectiveness of strategies used in
response to school bullying
