response to school bullying
There are many potential responses to bullying. In The Youth Voice Project (Davis and Nixon,
2013), 13,000 students were surveyed on whether responses to bullying were helpful, harmful,
or had no effect on them.
The graph below shows some of the common responses, as well as the percentage of students
who found the approach helpful. Click the image to enlarge.
IMAGE HERE
A graph summarizing the effectiveness of different bullying response strategies
There are many takeaways from this data: one thing to note is that the least helpful responses—
telling the person to stop, doing nothing, and pretending it didn’t bother me—are often given
as advice to students who experience bullying. While every bullying situation is different, these
data suggest that other approaches may be more helpful.  
Another takeaway from this data was that sometimes, adult responses are not helpful. When the
same students were surveyed to identify speciﬁc approaches that were most helpful from
adults, the results were again ranked from most to least helpful:
IMAGE HERE  
A graph displaying effectiveness of adult responses to bullying
For peers, the results had similar rates of effectiveness: 
IMAGE HERE
A graph depicting effectiveness of peer responses to bullying
Putting all this data together, the most helpful responses are listening to and spending time
with the person being bullied, while the least helpful responses involve ignoring the problem or
blaming the person being bullied. Again, while every bullying situation may be different and
require a different response, what is most likely to be helpful involves listening to and spending
time with the person being bullied, either as a peer or an adult.

Bullying Prevention Programs
There are several programs available to help prevent bullying. These programs vary in their
approaches, but each aims to create a safe and respectful school environment while
equipping students and educators with the skills needed to prevent and address bullying
behavior.
The Bully Prevention in Positive Behavior Support(BP-PBS) curriculum aligns with the
principles of positive behavior support and aims to create a safe and nurturing school climate
where bullying is less likely to occur. It draws on evidence-based practices to address the
various aspects of bullying, from prevention to intervention, with the goal of fostering a positive
and respectful school community. The curriculum is geared towards the elementary school
level.
PBIS Bullying Prevention Elementary School.pdf
1.4 MB
Bullying Prevention in Positive Behavior Support: Expect Respect is a handbook written with
and for middle and high school students. It also integrates bullying prevention efforts within
the framework of positive behavior support. It emphasizes cultivating a culture of respect and
empathy to prevent and address bullying behavior in schools.
PBIS Bullying Prevention Middle School.pdf
1.6 MB
Stop Bullying Now!is another prevention program for bullying. The link below shows you the
informative video series. The discussion guide is also provided for you to download and use with
the videos!
Kid Videos
Watch these videos to learn how KB, Josh, Milton, and their friends deal with kids who
bully. After watching each video, take a quiz to see how much you know about bullying.
READ MORE STOPBULLYING.GOV 
Stop Bullying Now Discussion Guide.pdf
1.6 MB

Enhancing School Climate and Promoting a Safe
School Environment 
Implementing Climate and Safety Initiatives within your School's
MTSS Framework
Collaborative Roles for School Climate and Safety
Understanding bullying, responding to crises, and taking measures to avert school violence are
important and immediate school climate factors. However, creating a sustained positive school
climate is a complex undertaking that all members of the school community can help support.
All members of the school community can help support a positive school climate. To review
roles of each member of the community, read the tabs below.  
State, District, or School Administrators –
State, district, and school administrators are leaders who can set the stage for successful
implementation of a positive school climate throughout entire schools or districts. They can
review data, serve on District Community Leadership Teams (DCLTs) and school-based teams,
and make decisions on which interventions to start, continue, or discontinue. Administrators can
also form policies and advocate for the importance of building a positive school climate. 
Teachers  –
Teachers also help support school climate. Teachers can inﬂuence school climate in their
individual classrooms. Adopting culturally responsive practices, involving families and
communities, and building strong and positive relationships with students can all contribute to
positive school climate. Teachers can also serve as positive role models for students.  
School Support Staff –
School support staff may include anyone working with a school aside from teachers and
administrators. These staff may be school social workers, counselors or psychologists, reading
specialists, nurses, or others in supportive roles in the school. These staff inﬂuence school climate
at the Tier 1 level, and at the Tier 2 and 3 levels for students who receive specialized interventions. 
School Resource Offfcers –
School resource offcers (SROs) are in the school setting to provide a safe learning environment,
enforce school discipline, and prevent and intervene in any school violence. The National
Association of School Resource Offcers (NASRO) aims to protect all students by providing
valuable resources to school staff while fostering positive relationships with students and
implementing best practices to prevent school violence. NASRO deﬁnes the main roles of SROs as
a “triad concept” where they can be: (1) educators, (2) informal counselors, and (3) law
enforcement offcers.
For more information about the SROs, please keep going with the lesson!
Family  –
School-family partnerships also contribute to school climate. Strong school-family-
partnerships with bidirectional communication provide opportunities for schools and families to
align expectations and values, build strong relationships, and support each other. To review more
information about school-family partnerships, review our lessons in Core MTSS and in this Tier 1
Module!
Community  –
Like families, communities contribute to a positive school climate through partnerships with the
school. Further, communities provide the context for understanding and appreciating the
strengths and challenges that surround the lives of students in your school.


Implementing School Climate and Safety Practices within the MTSS Framework
Developing and sustaining a positive school climate involves proactive measures that address
problems before they become major concerns. A strong integrated MTSS enables targeted
support for enhancing school climate and safety at all three tiers, with foundational
preventative initiatives in place at the Tier 1, or universal, level. Successful implementation
allows all students to feel safe, supported, and better able to focus on learning and growing.
IMAGE HERE
A graphic illustrating Multi-Tiered System of Supports triangle
A positive school climate emerges from intentional safety-focused initiatives and
environmental enhancement practices. Schools can utilize the critical features of the MTSS
(data-informed decision making, collaborative teamwork, professional development, family
and community engagement) to support sustained implementation of evidence-based school
safety practices and ongoing monitoring of school climate.

Using data to make decisions about positive school climate practices
According to the Safe Supportive Schools Model, there are ﬁve steps to improving school
climate that can be thought of as a cycle. Data is taken to determine how things are going. Using
that data, interventions are evaluated, and decisions are made to continue, improve, or replace
interventions. Changes are planned and then implemented. Then, the cycle begins again! For
more details, review the graphic below. Click to enlarge the image.
IMAGE HERE
Cycle of School Climate Enhancement
Let's look at each step of the cycle in more detail!
Supporting School Climate
The aim here is to consistently optimize students' academic success, emotional
development, and overall life outcomes while minimizing the risk of negative
behaviors and incidents. Scroll through for more information

Step 1: Review and Evaluate Data 
As mentioned earlier, improving school climate in the MTSS framework involves
making use of the data that is available to you. There are several sources of data for
measuring school climate, such as these:
- Attendance data 
- Academic data: grades, test scores, graduation rates 
- Behavioral data: offce discipline referrals (ODRs)  
Surveys and feedback:  
- PBIS Center Surveys—the PBIS Center has several surveys available for families,
staff, and students to assess the various aspects of school climate. For a full guide
and link to these surveys, review the document below, PBIS School Climate
Surveys.pdf 
- School Safety Surveys (SSSs)— some school climate surveys focus on safety
speciﬁcally. 
Please recall that Tier 1 supports are universal meaning that ALL students are assessed
with these surveys.
Remember from the Core MTSS course, you learned about needs assessment and
progress monitoring. In supporting school climate, we use needs assessment and
progress monitoring data on student outcomes to support students' behavioral,
social, emotional, and academic needs.
Data can be used at the individual, family, and community levels. Review each in the
next section of this lesson.

Step 2: Assess Current Programmatic Interventions 
The next step in the process is to assess the current interventions that are in place.
Important questions to ask at this stage are:  
- What interventions are being used, if any? 
- What does the data suggest about the effectiveness of these programs? 
- What are the priority challenges and needs in our school that could be addressed
through intervention? 

Step 3 Select Programmatic Interventions
Using the information you've gotten from analyzing your data and assessing your
interventions, the next step is to select which programs to start, continue, or
discontinue. There are many options for programmatic interventions that are
available for use in the school setting to address climate at the Tier 1 level. Here are
some examples of programmatic interventions.
- Schoolwide PBIS
- Stop Bullying Now
- Olweus Bullying Prevention Program
- Restorative Practices
- Mental health literacy programs
- Positive health and wellbeing universal programming

Step 4 Plan Changes 
The next step is to plan the implementation of the intervention selected. Important
questions to ask at this stage are:  
- What is the process for adapting this intervention? 
- Who will be involved with implementation, and what will their role be? 
- When will we start implementation? 
- How will we monitor our progress? 

Step 5 Implement Changes 
At this stage, the planning from Step 4 is put into action! With solid planning as a
foundation, you are ready to begin implementing changes. 
Summary
Once changes are being implemented, the next step is to once again review data and
evaluate, restarting the cycle! School climate improvement is far from a one-time
event: it is a continual process.  


Different Levels of Data
As mentioned in the steps above, data can be used at the individual,
family, and community levels.
- Individual Level: You can use the SSSs result and look for factors that can increase students' risk of being involved in being victims of crime or violence. After identifying these factors, you can encourage your students to be involved in various preventive activities. Some examples of these activities include conﬂict-resolution classes and skill-building training groups or intergenerational projects where community elders share knowledge and traditions with youth.
- Family and Peer Levels: At the family or peer levels, your goal should be enhancing the strength and well-being of ALL families, caregivers, and peers. You can achieve this by encouraging families, caregivers, and peers to involve themselves in activities including mentoring programs for
parents/caregivers, after-school programs involving parents/caregivers, and peer mentoring programs. These mentoring programs promote social skills and positive attitudes and behaviors. These activities support skill development in parents and caregivers, especially those who care for youth who may be at risk for violence.
- Community and School Levels: At the community and school levels, the results of the SSSs should lead you in directions to increase schools’ and communities' ability to prevent crime and victimization. At this level, activities should promote community cooperation for crime prevention through social development and will involve various stakeholders including schools, teachers, social agencies, and parents/caregivers. These prevention activities could include holding public meetings or workshops on community issues, developing community action plans, building public awareness and consensus building, running school-based anti-bullying campaigns, or creating networks and coalitions to address crime and victimization problems. 

School-wide Practices to Help Support Positive School Climate
Implementing climate and safety surveys
For a review of PBIS Center School climate surveys, including sample surveys, download the
information below.
Download the following PDF for an example of a School Safety Survey developed by the
University of Oregon.
The National Center on Safe, Supportive Learning Environments also has several surveys
available for use. To explore these surveys, as well as a question bank to create your own
surveys, review the link below.
School Climate Survey Compendium
As States, districts and schools explore measuring school climate, one of the
biggest questions they have is about which survey to use. It can be diffcult to
know which surveys are valid and reliable, what they measure, and which are
free.
READ MORE ED 
School Safety Surveys (SSSs) are used to determine risk and protective factors for
schools. In the Core MTSS course, you learned about team-based leadership. These same
teams use SSS results to assess risk and protective factors. SSS also helps you determine
what training and support may be needed to address school safety and violence
prevention in the school.
Implementing practices geared toward building and
maintaining strong relationships
There are many relationships in a school: as you likely know from experience, everyone in the
school is interconnected in various ways. For example, there are relationships between:
- Students and other students
- Students and teachers
- Students and administrators
- Teachers and administrators
- Teachers and other teachers
- School support staff and teachers
…and many more! The way that various groups are treated makes a big difference in the climate
of the school and how welcomed, safe, and supported everyone feels.  
Strong student-to-teacher relationships are extremely important in supporting a positive
school climate. While teachers often want to build strong relationships with students, they may
face challenges along the way. When this happens, it is important to have a plan for what to do.
An Establish-Maintain-Restore model is one approach for this, which you brieﬂy touched on in
the previous lesson: "Elevating Family and Student Engagement" (Cook, 2018). This method
involves three steps to building strong relationships:  
1 Establish the relationship: From the start, be intentional to build a strong student-
teacher relationship. The goal at this stage is to build trust, foster acceptance, and
gain understanding. This time given to building relationships is called “banking.”
Teachers make “deposits” of time and energy that help build up a strong and
meaningful relationship that can be called on in more diffcult times.  
2 Maintain the relationship: The next step is to maintain these relationships through
ongoing positive interactions. It is recommended to have a ratio of 5:1 for positive to
negative interactions with students (Cook, 2017). Examples of positive interactions
may include compliments, empathy, positive greetings in the morning, praise for
schoolwork or behavior, and any other positive statements. Negative interactions
may include misunderstandings, disagreements, discipline or other negative
statements.  
3 Restore the relationship:This phase addresses how to respond
to negative interactions. While it is helpful to try to prevent
negative interactions as much as possible, it is very common
that they may still occur, so it’s also important to be able to
respond as effectively as possible to move forward in the
relationship. 
Restoring the relationship can be particularly challenging. Here are ﬁve methods for restoring
the relationship (Cook, 2018).
- letting go of the previous event
- taking responsibility for or ownership of the problem 
- validating student feelings with an empathy statement 
- solving problems collaboratively 
- making a statement of care by separating the deed from the doer 
The use of these ﬁve methods will likely depend on the speciﬁc situation and student, and
combinations of these methods may also be needed. However, across all situations, the core
values of empathy and respect can go a long way in supporting positive relationships.
For a video on building relationships through daily
handshakes, watch the video below!
VIDEO HERE
This video highlights fifth-grade teacher Barry White Jr. of Ashley Park Elementary
School in Charlotte, North Carolina, and how he greets his students with special
handshakes every day before they enter class.
Simply arriving at school in the morning is such an important part of the day. Students bring in
whatever happened last night or right before school, and greetings are just one of the many
ways educators can, and are, "checking in" with each student.
Here is a video about the importance of greeting students at the door!
Greeting Students at the Door || Is it Worth the Extra Time?
Additional Efforts to Support Positive School Climate
Let's examine the best practices and key stakeholders—
so you know your role and others—in promoting
positive school climate and safe schools.
The practices aimed at fostering a positive school climate can be categorized into three distinct
sections based on their impact, priority, and effort it takes to implement. They are:
- Short term practices: These are the easiest and quickest to implement to address a
need. You can use these practices to quickly identify and ﬁnd solutions to a
situation. These are in the graphic's blue column below.
- Medium term practices: These will take some time and have a meaningful impact.
Implementing these strategies may take medium effort. These are in the graphic's
white column below.
- Long term practices: These will require the most effort yet will have a greater
impact. Implementing these practices will require extensive time and development.
These are in the graphic's green column below.
In implementing these strategies, we suggest you use a range of short-, medium- and long-
term practices.
When implementing these new practices, always be mindful of the existing strategies in the
school setting. To avoid confusion and remain effective, either integrate new practices into
existing ones or limit the implementation of new ones.
Another thing to consider is that starting small and going big is fruitful! When you start small
and support school safety through school climate efforts, you are more likely to be successful.
Always remember to celebrate successes, whether they are small or big! 
Explore the practice below.
Short term, Identify hotspot: Where are the hotspots? Look for and observe the unsafe areas in the school. These areas may be
playgrounds, under stairwells, or in other locations. Once you find these hotspots, talk with students and
ask them how they feel about their safety in these areas. If you are unable to locate these hotspots, and
students do not want to talk about them, provide them with a map of the school and color code the areas
(for example, green being the safest area and red being the least safe).
Key stakeholders: Teachers, school counselors, and other school personnel are engaged in this practice.
Be sure to also include students and understand their perspectives. This approach will also make students
feel heard!
Short term, Respond to stressful or painful events: Observe and document what students express about stressful or painful events. Then engage with students
about these events. Understanding how students feel about these events will help you promote school
climate and safety as you see the bigger picture and better understand how the issues impact them. 
Key stakeholders: This practice includes teachers, students, parents and caregivers and other members of
the school community.
Medium term, Personal commitments: Encourage students and all staff to create and reflect upon personal commitments to the— work of
improving and enhancing school safety. These commitments will promote a sense of accountability and
responsibility.
Key Stakeholders: Engage all school personnel and students in this practice. Students can practice writing
these commitments as part of their instructional time. For school staff and other professionals, this work
can be done during departmental meetings and/or in professional learning communities.
Medium term, Creating classroom expectations: Creating classroom expectations is another way to promote school climate and safety. When creating
classroom expectations, it is important to involve students. When students are involved in creating
classroom norms and management, they are more likely to obey these norms and less likely to misbehave.
For more information about classroom expectations, continue to our lesson on “Creating and
Implementing Schoolwide Expectations.” 
Key Stakeholders: The key stakeholders in creating classroom expectations are students, and classroom
teachers.
Medium term, consider byu-in from educators early in the year: It is essential for all educators involved with promoting school climate and safety to be on the same page and willing to participate. To address the potential resistance from adults in promoting all facets of school
safety, it is beneficial to initially assess areas of discomfort. Surveying teachers and staff about potential
concerns they may have can help address these issues and ensure buy-in. 
Key Stakeholders: Engage all staff. This is most effective in all-staff meetings at the start of the school
year so that all school personnel, not just teachers, are included and their voices are heard.
Medium term, ongoing discipline policy review:Use discipline data to identify the discipline policies that are most used. Identify whether the policies are overused. To make sure that the policies are appropriate, you can also align school policies with district
vision statements. Holding focus groups with teachers, principals, parents, and student groups allows for
the identification of pain points for each stakeholder group. Another step districts can take is to develop
MOUs with school resource officers that are based on best practices and reflect their responsibilities in
district policy.
Key Stakeholders: School district level staff, parents and caregivers, and students are the stakeholders
here, ensuring all voices are heard.
Medium term, Similar to the earlier recommendation to include students in developing their classroom norms,
promoting student engagement and the student voice is important for effective school climate
improvement efforts. When students are given the opportunity to be heard and to participate in
schoolwide initiatives, there is a greater likelihood of successful efforts. This success, in turn, creates a
safer school environment.
Key Stakeholders: Here, the key stakeholders are your students! Get students involved to have them
heard!
long term, have morning meeting with students: Implementing morning meetings daily or weekly can help you develop stronger ties with your students.
These could be short 10 to 15-minute check-ins to support student needs across the school year.
Key Stakeholders: Teachers and students are the key stakeholders but  provide support to teachers by also
identifying additional school staff to engage with students on a regular basis through a defined schedule.
Analyze student performance data: To have effective outcomes, teams need to develop systems and processes for analyzing student behavior
and academic performance data on an ongoing basis. Educators should set outcome goals for each student
or cluster of students who are below, at, and above the target objective level. Performance data should
include both academic and non-academic indicators of student success.
Key Stakeholders: School support staff, classroom teachers, administrators, and non-licensed classroom
staff are all stakeholders for this practice.

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- School climate refers to the environment of a school and has a signiﬁcant impact
on how students, teachers, and staff experience the school setting
- The goal is to create a positive school climate and a safe school environment for all
students, school staff, and parents/caregivers by preventing and responding
quickly to violence in schools
- Be proactive, rather than waiting for violence to happen. Proactive approaches are
always the most effective in addressing challenges with school safety
- Bullying is a common concern for students that can negatively impact school
climate and safety. There are many programs and strategies for preventing and
reducing bullying that can be used to help prevent it
- When enhancing school climate and averting school violence, implement the
evidence-based strategies and practices as recommended in this lesson. In
implementing these approaches, be mindful that a one-size-ﬁts-all approach does
not work for preventing school violence. Always use data to ensure that
programming is having the intended impact
- Relationship enhancement is one way to improve school climate and safety. To
enhance relationships, you can use the Establish-Maintain-Restore (EMR) model
- A combination of short-, medium-, and long-term practices can help promote
school climate and school safety
Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations





@@@@@
Lesson 2 of 2
Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations
Outcomes:
1. Analyze expectations within the school context
2. Demonstrate the importance of schoolwide expectations as they relate to academics,
behavior, and positive health and wellbeing
3. Identify and explain the process of creating academic, behavioral, and positive health
and wellbeing expectations
4. Address practically implementing schoolwide expectations
5. Critically evaluate responses to students when expectations are or are not met

Expecting...the Expected?
Expectations in the School Setting
What to Expect When You're Expecting 's book cover
In 1984, Heidi Murkoff published What to Expect When You're Expecting. This pregnancy guide
used a question-and-answer format to address common worries or curiosities expecting
parents had about their pregnancy. Since its publication, What to Expect When You're
Expectinghas sold more than 42 million copies, was turned into a movie by Lionsgate in 2012,
and expanded into an online community with a website and app.
Whether it's about pregnancy, job offers, or how your dog will behave at the dog
park, everyone has expectations for everyone and everything.
The popularity of What to Expect When You're Expectingshows how much value people place on
understanding expectations. The importance of deﬁning and knowing our expectations in
school is no different!
Expectations:anticipated outcomes or standards for a certain situation, person, or behavior.

Expectations in Schools
In schools, expectations are intentionally broad. They are linked to more speciﬁc rules or skills,
which are the tools used to meet expectations. Rules and skills can be set up to support learning,
behavior, and positive health and wellbeing. Speciﬁc rules, skills, and expectations should be
matched to student and staff values, developmental levels, and cultural backgrounds. 
Here are some examples of the most widely used schoolwide social expectations in the United
States (Lynass et al., 2012):
Be respectful
Be responsible
Be safe
Be ready to learn
Care
Work together
Do your best
Be kind
Expectations are the blueprint and Tier 1 supports are speciﬁcs created
to get there. These supports should be accessible to everyone!
Let's listen to Dr. Jake Klipsch, a principal in an
alternative high school, explain how vital expectations
are in education.
Watch from 0:00 to 5:17; don't worry - we will come back for the rest later in this lesson!
The Reality We Create: Expectations and Education | Jake Klipsch ……
The Reality We Create: Expectations and Education | Jake Klipsch 
As you can tell, expectations play a signiﬁcant role within our schools. By proactively creating
and implementing schoolwide expectations about academics, behavior, and positive health and
wellbeing*, provide students and staff with a school climate that is predictable, welcoming, and
respectful.
Positive health and wellbeing refers to the social, emotional, and mental healthiness of a
person.This is the term we, The SBHA, use, but you may be more familiar with the term
"social emotional learning” which you will still see in the outside resources we link! Don’t
worry. Even though the term we use in these lessons is "positive health and wellbeing", the
material shared with “social emotional learning” in it still applies!
We can neither excuse nor scold them for not knowing; we
must teach them and provide support, insistence, and
expectations.
Dr. Ruby K. Payne, Educator and Expert on Poverty and Schooling
Like Dr. Payne said, one cannot assume that students know all our expectations, so you need to
intentionally teach and promote them in such a way that every student can meet them.
Ultimately, schoolwide expectations are a common language of appropriate behaviors and
attitudes for all students and staff to understand. 
In this lesson, you will analyze how to create and implement schoolwide expectations, evaluate
types of expectations within a school, and examine how expectations can be used to build
healthy relationships. First—a knowledge check!

Making Expectations
The "Who" and "How" Behind Creating Expectations
Who Creates Expectations at the School?
Creating and implementing schoolwide expectations is a team effort! Teaming is a core
component of the Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS) framework.
Your school may have a Tier 1 Leadership Team that creates the schoolwide expectations, or
your school may have a general leadership team that does so. Whether your school has teams
within teams or a couple of larger groups, your schoolwide expectations are ideally co-created
with educators, administrators, families, school health and behavioral health staff, community
partners, and students. Expectations should be a consensus, reﬂecting values shared by your
entire school community.
When possible, the team creating schoolwide expectations will discuss them before the school
year starts and then monitor them throughout the academic year. To protect and promote your
relationships with families, educators, and students especially, use emailed or texted surveys as
a solution to gather suggestions, feedback, and input from families with busy schedules. Focus
groups, whether online or in person, can further the conversation about expectations, from
their creation to their completion. 
Family in a room with a fort in the background
As you learned in Lesson Two, you know family engagement promotes
healthy youth development. When it comes to co-creating schoolwide
expectations, engaging with parents and caregivers ensures that the
expectations are culturally relevant and reﬂect student and family values. It
also prompts discussion about the differences between expectations within
the school and those at home.
Partnering with Students & Families
Students affrm that the more involved they are in creating and implementing expectations, the
more they care about following them (Llyod et al., 2022). 
Here are practical ways you can partner with students and families.
- Surveys asking for household values and input on schoolwide expectations while
drafting expectations
- Emails asking for feedback on schoolwide once a list is created
- Focus groups with students, parents, and caregivers that are held in person or
virtually
- Brainstorming classroom expectations with your students during teh ﬁrst two
weeks of school
- Gathering suggestions from students by using drop boxes throughout classrooms
- Partnering with diverse students, parents, and caregivers in the leadership team responsible for creating and implementing expectations.
When creating expectations with students, do this at the developmentally appropriate level.
Whether creating a song with elementary students about expectations, a TikTok dance with
your middle schoolers, or a straightforward paragraph in response to a prompt with high
schoolers, creating and implementing expectations with students builds relationships and sets
you up for success. 
When brainstorming your schoolwide expectations, use data regarding student outcomes and
behavior, family and student input, and the decisions from the leadership team to create three
to ﬁve schoolwide expectations.
Guidelines for Creating Expectations
As you contemplate creating expectations, it can be helpful to consider the following:
- "What is it we want our students to know and be able to do?"
- "How will we know if each student has learned it?"
- "How will we respond when students do not learn it?"
- "How will we extend learning for students who demonstrated proﬁciency?"
How you answer these questions, asked by Jeremy Phillips (2022; p.56), can be a helpful,
intuitive starting point for determining the expectations you want to have in your schools for
students.
Because expectations are for both students and staff, let's reframe these questions to involve
staff as well.
- How will we ensure our students learn expectations through our teaching and
example?
- What takeaways do we want students to have when we reinforce expectations?
- How will we verify that we are following standards for creating, implementing, and
following expectations?
With these questions in mind, you can create schoolwide expectations with the following
guidelines adapted from Teacher Tool Classroom Expectations and Rules (2017):
Observable
Measurable
Understandable
Always Applicable
Memorable
Positively Stated
Look through the tabs by using the arrows on either side to learn more about each guideline and
see examples as needed!
Observable –
The schoolwide expectations become observable when linked to rules or skills that you can see in
use by students to meet the expectations.
Example: The expectation, “Be Respectful” is observable with the rule or skill, “Raise Your Hand
During Class Before Speaking”.
Measurable –
You should be able to “count” students fulﬁlling rules and skills associated with each expectation.
You can count how many students are following the expectations based on their disciplinary
referrals, the number of students receiving Tier 3 supports, academic outcomes, and so on.
Example: The expectation, “Be Honest” can be measured by the number of students referred to
the offce for disciplinary action regarding cheating or plagiarism. 
Understandable –
Each expectation and its associated rules are tailored to the developmental and cultural
backgrounds of the students they apply to.
Example: In an elementary school, the expectation, “Be Respectful” comes with the rule, “Keep
Your Hands and Feet to Yourself," whereas a high school rule may be, “Be mindful of others'
personal space.” 
Always Applicable –
As you may have noticed, the expectations are a bit vague. This is intentional: the expectations
must be broad enough to cover the varied contexts and situations within a school setting. Having
a broad expectation ensures that it is the standard instead of an exception. 
Example: The expectation "Be Safe" can be contextualized to crosswalks, classrooms,
equipment, and online activity. However, making "Check Signals Before Crossing in the Parking
Lot" an expectation instead of a rule prevents it from applying across other school areas.
Memorable –
It is important for students and staff to recall their school’s expectations. Connecting
expectations to the school motto, mascot, or name can be helpful ways to increase memorability.
Having memorable expectations is another reason why no more than ﬁve expectations are
encouraged. Alliteration can also be helpful!
Example: “Be Ready, Be Responsible, Be Respectful" is an example of alliteration in expectations.
Another example of memorable expectations is “Sutton Hill School’s Star Ways: Be Safe, Be
Thoughtful, Be Aware, Be Respectful”. 
Positively Stated –
Expectations are the standards for what to do, instead of what not to do. This is important: it is
the difference between being proactive with positive behavior, values, and attitudes rather than
being reactivetowards what is unhelpful or disruptive.
Example: A positively stated value is, “Be Trustworthy,” whereas “Don’t Cheat, Don’t Lie, and
Don’t Gossip” are negatively stated expectations. 
You have learned what expectations are, why they're important, and the "how-to" of creating
them practically. After a you take break and pass this knowledge check, move forward to
examine three key types of expectations in the school setting: academic, behavioral, and
positive health and wellbeing.


Academic Expectations
Expectations for Coursework and Classrooms
This is a brief section; after all, you're already familiar with schoolwide academic expectations! 
The South Carolina Department of Education’s standards for learning are your schoolwide
expectations for learning. Attached a link to those standards broken up by subject if you want a
refresher.
Standards & Learning
The Offce of Standards and Learning provides standards development,
supporting documents for standards, and professional learning.
READ MORE SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Check out an example of academic standards below!
IMAGE HERE
Graphic comparing South Carolina's Standards of Learning for mathematics for
kindergarteners and high schoolers
These expectations are...
- Observable and measurable based on academic performance (e.g., number of students passing, end-of-course grades, etc.)
- Understandable for each developmental and cultural level
- Always applicableto every student in every school
- Positively stated by focusing on what students willlearn rather than what they have not learned or will not
While your school already uses the State standards for academics, you can take it further by
creating school expectations for improvement or effort. Those may be classroom expectations
you make as an educator. If you would like to learn more about taking schoolwide expectations
and adapting them for your speciﬁc classroom, take our Tier 2 course! 
For now, let's move onward to look more in-depth at behavioral expectations before diving into
positive health and wellbeing expectations.

Behavioral Expectations
Expecting the Best Out of Actions
Chances are, you already know a thing or two about behavioral expectations in your school.
Perhaps the most well-known example of schoolwide expectations regarding behavior is
Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS). Your school may even be using PBIS to set
schoolwide behavioral expectations already. If so, these principles will be helpful refreshers. If
your school does not use PBIS, you will ﬁnd valuable principles that can be applied in your
schools and classrooms! 
While all expectations interact with one another, behavioral expectations are crucial in
establishing a predictable environment wherein the other expectations can ﬂourish.

Practical Steps to Setting Up Schoolwide Behavioral Expectations
To brainstorm schoolwide behavioral expectations, the National PBIS Leadership Forum in 2011
encourages educators to take three to ﬁve schoolwide expectations and attach two to ﬁve
descriptors of speciﬁc, observable behavior that exemplify meeting those expectations in each
speciﬁc school context (e.g., hallway, cafeteria, school drop-off). 
These are the "Turning Cellphones Off while in the Classroom"
rulesthat link back to the "Be Respectful" expectation.
To jumpstart your thought process, ask yourself: "How would a student display being respectful
within the cafeteria? Howcwould they show that they're being safe? What about responsible?"
Teaching matrices are an extremely helpful method of organizing your answers to these
questions and the descriptors you attach to your expectations. A helpful tip is to ﬁll out each
context as a team, but let individual teachers create their own expectations for their speciﬁc
classrooms.
Check out some examples below by clicking on them to
IMAGE HERE
If you're in need of more inspiration, you can download the attached resource from the
Oklahoma Department of Education that has examples of teaching matrices for elementary,
middle, and high schools! 
Example Behavior Expectations Matrices .pdf
791.2 KB
Attached is also this blank, customizable template for you to use!
Customizable Behavioral Matrix.pdf.png
170.5 KB
When thinking through the behaviors you want to emphasize with your behavioral
expectations, review your data. Use the data gathered from offce discipline referrals (ODRs),
teacher and student input, and observations as a team to ﬁnd those areas. 
As you outline the expected behavior, remember to keep your expectations positively stated. For
example, use “Listen to Each Other Without Interrupting” instead of “Don’t Talk Over Each
Other." 
Students learn and internalize the expectations presented by the school through explicit
instruction, reteaching, prompted opportunities to exhibit skills, and modeled behaviors by the
educators themselves. 
The Importance of Contextualizing Behavioral Expectations
In a study of 155 schools across 12 regionally representative US states, Lynass et al. (2012) found
the following behavioral rules to be the most common under the top three most common broad
expectations: respect, responsibility, safety.
TABLE HERE
There is a lot of overlap between behavioral expectations, as well as a lot of ambiguity! You can
click on the Venn diagram to enlarge it if needed.
IMAGE HERE
Venn diagram of three circles: respect, responsibility, and safety
It is important to contextualize your behavioral expectations in that which is culturally and
developmentally relevant to your student body while simultaneously acknowledging that some
expectations may have different meanings for different groups. 
For example, it is common to eat with one’s hands in many cultures. This may not appear as
“neat and clean” to those who are accustomed to using cutlery. These differences don't mean
that one group is “right” and the other is “wrong." When interpreting behavioral expectations
for students, rely on input from families and students, especially those from different cultures
and backgrounds. Creating more detailed deﬁnitions of “Neat and Clean” to broaden staff and
students' awareness can clarify a subjectivity that may contribute to inequity or stigma. 
With a ﬁrmer understanding of behavioral expectations, you're ready to review positive health
and wellbeing expectations after this knowledge check.

Positive Health and Wellbeing Expectations
Supporting Wellbeing Intentionally
It may feel odd to have expectations and subsequent rules for students' and staff's positiv
health and wellbeing. However, as you've already learned, Tier 1 supports are proactive and
preventative. By articulating standards through expectations, you are better able to see when
students are struggling to reach those goals. This, in turn, equips us to determine which
students need additional support from Tier 2 or Tier 3.
Schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing shows
students and staff that youcare about more than just their academics
or behavior, but thatyou care about their whole being as well.
Schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing contribute to our desire for students
to grow, not just academically, but mentally, emotionally, and socially. Schoolwide expectations
for positive health and wellbeing contribute to that growth the same way expectations for
academics and behaviors do. 
Practically Setting Schoolwide Expectations for Positive
Health and Wellbeing
It can feel overwhelming to think through positive health and wellbeing expectations for your
school. Positive health and wellbeing covers a broad spectrum, encompassing mental, social,
and emotional aspects. You will learn more about what this looks like practically in the next
lesson on elevating wellness! For now, the good news is that the state of South Carolina already
outlined ﬁve core areas of positive health and wellbeing in its Proﬁle of a South Carolina
graduate! These are based in the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning
(CASEL).
Self-Awareness
Social Awareness
Self-Management
Relationship Skills
Responsible Decision Making

Positive Health and Wellbeing
What competencies in positive health and wellbeing should a South Carolina graduate
possess?
Step 1
Self-Awareness
Recognizing one's emotions, thoughts, and values; knowing one's strengths and
limitations; grounded self-conﬁdence; a "growth" mindset
Step 2
Social Awareness
Taking the perspective of and empathizing with others, including those who are
different from oneself; understanding social norms in different settings; recognizing
supports in one's school, family, and community for behavior and attitudes
Step 3
Self-Management
Regulating one's emotions, thoughts, and behavior in any situation; managing
impulses, self-motivation to set, work towards, and accomplish goals
Step 4
Relationship Skills
Establishing and maintaining healthy, mutually fulﬁlling relationships with people
of all backgrounds; communicating clearly; navigating conﬂict; being ﬁrm against
inappropriate peer pressure
Step 5
Responsible Decision Making
Making constructive choices about one's behavior and interactions based on ethical
standards, one's values, and social norms; evaluating consequences of an action and
making decisions with that in mind
Summary
Throughout all ﬁve competencies, students are learning to advocate for themselves
and others while further understanding their own identity, strengths and limitations,
and live a life in line with their values and goals.

Creating rules or skills based on expectations for positive health and wellbeing may feel like the
most challenging out of the three kinds of expectations. In many ways, it is easier to measure
students meeting the expectation of “Be Safe” by properly and safely handling equipment in the
science lab than it is to measure students being safe by not caving-in to inappropriate peer
pressure. 
Practically, setting schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing is done through
curricula, but don't worry. You’re not alone in the process of drafting curriculum for schoolwide
expectations for positive health and wellbeing. Not only do you have your team, but you also
have the rich curricula recognized by South Carolina’s Department of Education! 
While you’ll learn more about speciﬁc lessons, activities, or exercises to use for positive health
and wellbeing in both the upcoming lesson on wellness and in Tier 2, the curriculum and tools
you decide on ahead of time is foundational. Let’s review three of those now, one for each
school level!

Positive Health and Wellbeing Resources
First 20 Days of School for 3rd and 4th Grade Elementary Students
A method for setting schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing can be to
implement speciﬁc lessons regarding each area of competency. An example of this is the
curriculum developed by the South Carolina Department of Education for 3rd and 4th graders'
ﬁrst 20 days back in school.
Lesson plans with speciﬁc activities are developed for each of the 20 days. The lesson plans are
allocated across competency areas, and include instructions, resources, and reﬂection
opportunities. You will cover methods teachers can use to adapt lesson plans for their speciﬁc
classrooms in Tier 2, but it is important to ground the lesson plans in the previously decided
upon curriculum to ensure consistency across the principles being taught. 
Here are a few examples of lesson plans that revolve around interactive reading activities!
I'M  ALL EARS: This reading activity focuses on teaching students relationship-management skills. The teacher
reads Howard B. Wigglebottom Learns to Listen, and pauses throughout to discuss what happens
when Howard does or does not listen. Recommendations to make the reading more tangible
include creating a cause-and-effect chart of what happens when Howard doesn't listen compared
to when he does. Students are then encouraged to talk about a time when they didn't listen and
what the outcome was, and talk about strategies they can use to listen to one another in the
classroom.
SAME BUT DIFFERENT:This activity focuses on expanding students' social awareness. South Carolina's Department of
Education recommends different books for this, includingSkin Like Mineby Latashia Perry or
Same, Same But Differentby Jenny Sue Kostecki-Shaw. The teacher leads a discussion about
people from different cultures, backgrounds, and abilities. Students can discuss or journal about
where they are from and what they like to do and can be grouped into pairs or smaller groups to
discuss how they are similar and different.
MANAGING EMOTIONS:Students learn more about self-management in this activity where the teacher reads When Sophie
Gets Angry...Really, Really Angry....by Molly Bang. The goal of reading about emotions is to teach
students how to name emotions as well as how to manage them so that they don't hurt themselves
or other people. Teachers can display other emotion words for "anger" and ask students how they
physically feel when they're angry. Students can then write about how they can manage anger in
different settings, like the home, school, or a friend's house. In groups, students can discuss a
time they were angry, what prompted it, and how they managed it.

Character Playbook for Middle Schoolers
Districts in South Carolina, along with CASEL, have partnered with EVERFI for many years. Your
own district may be using EVERFI already! EVERFI offers 20 free courses designed for students
on a multitude of different positive health and wellbeing topics for middle and high schoolers. It
also includes courses on ﬁnancial literacy.
One of the courses for middle schoolers is called, "Character Playbook".
EVERFI
Character Playbook - Healthy Relationships | EVERFI
Character Playbook is an innovative digital character education program that
uses engaging social-emotional learning activities to educate students about
cultivating and maintaining healthy relationships during their critical middle
school and high school years. Character Playbook is composed of ﬁve modules
that cover key concepts around positive character development, social-
emotional learning (SEL), and building healthy relationships, based on the
CASEL standards for SEL.

This two hour course involves a digital character education program where students work
through real life scenarios. Students go through the key concepts previously mentioned: self-
awareness, social awareness, self-management, relationship skills, and responsible decision
making!
See the images from EVREFI's website that showcase some of the scenarios students work
through!
IMAGE HERE
Images from EVERFI's Character Playbook, titled "How Are You Feeling?"
IMAGE HERE
Images from EVERFI's Character Playbook, Titled "It's All About You!"
IMAGE HERE
Images from EVERFI's Character Playbook, Titled "Let's Talk about Relationships!"
Understanding Mental Wellness for High Schoolers

For high school students, courses regarding positive health and wellbeing can go more in depth
than younger grades to match their developmental level. South Carolina's Department of
Education puts EVERFI courses at the forefront of its recommendations. Here's a review of one
of their courses, “Understanding Mental Wellness”!
EVERFI
Understanding Mental Wellness | EVERFI
Like our physical health, our mental health can be strengthened or diminished
through daily habits. Understanding Mental Wellness introduces students to
the topic of mental health and the ways in which they can implement coping
strategies to manage their own challenging thoughts, emotions, and behaviors.
READ MORE EVERFI 
This holds six lessons that take a total of an hour to an hour and a half. Students learn key
deﬁnitions, coping strategies, and how to offer and seek help. In the next lesson, you will learn
more about mental wellness yourself, as well as strategies to use with students!
PBIS and Positive Health and Wellbeing
While PBIS focuses primarily on behavior, its structure and resources can be adapted to creating
and implementing schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing! PBIS even
encourages this itself (PBIS, 2018).
Since PBIS is a form of MTSS, using PBIS to create schoolwide expectations about positive
health and wellbeing involves doing what you’re already doing—relying on data to see what
competencies need extra teaching and working within your team! The extra step is applying the
competencies you want to emphasize in your schools to the PBIS matrix.
Similar to specifying behavioral descriptors under each value per school context, describe
activities or attitudes students can demonstrate for each positive health and wellbeing
competency. See the image below for an example; if you need to enlarge it, just click on it!
TABLE HERE
Table of positive health and Wellbeing; Rules are in Italics and Outlined
As with behavior, showing students positive health and wellbeing expectations involves explicit
instruction, reteaching throughout the year, providing opportunities to practice, and modeling
the expectations oneself. In the lesson on enhancing wellness, you’ll learn more practical steps
to enhance and maintain your and your students' positive health and wellbeing! 
Positive Health and Wellbeing for Families and
Caregivers
When building schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing, it is important to
partner with families to decide the skills that are especially needed within the student body and
how schools can support practices in the home and vice versa. This communicates that the
school cares about more than just academics, ultimately contributing to a foundational
relationship between the families and schools. This supports students' wellbeing through all
tiers!
General Resources
As we acknowledged earlier, creating expectations for positive health and wellbeing is not easy.
It is distinct from academic and behavioral expectations in that it is harder to quantify or
materialize what positive health and wellbeing actually looks like. Here, we've gathered
resources for you to analyze and consider, whether as a jumping off point or for your end goal.
South Carolina Department of Education EVERFI
Instructions
"EVERFI is an invaluable resource for our students as a method for engaging
instruction because of its relevant and authentic application to students' lives.
Students grow as a result of this program in extremely positive ways - both in
their understanding of ﬁnancial literacy and their interest in the subject
matter."

Implementing Expectations
Putting the Expectations into Place
You’ve done the work. You met with your team, examined data, coordinated with parents, spoke
to students, drafted your expectations matrices, and decided upon your positive health and
wellbeing lesson plans—now what? 
Implementing expectations starts with visibility.
It is important for students and staff to see what the expectations are in each context. This can
be done by using posters of your matrices in the appropriate contexts. This is a great
opportunity to involve students! Have younger students craft posters using markers, glitter, and
other fun tools! Alternatively, get a stuffed animal that matches your mascot and let students
take it home each weekend and discuss how the mascot implemented school values at home.
Older students can create videos discussing one particular expectation or rule that is played
during morning announcements, or even create a website or web content that is posted
through the school’s own homepage. 

As mentioned before, students need time to learn expectations. You can take the ﬁrst two weeks
of an academic year and focus on teaching students in your classroom the expectations and the
speciﬁc actions to follow them. This can be done differently at each developmental level:
elementary age students may need more deﬁnitions, examples and non-examples, and memory
refreshers while high schoolers may do well with a section in the syllabus dedicated to
expectations and a quiz on it during their ﬁrst week. Reviewing expectations after winter break
is another preventive strategy to ensure that expectations are not just seen but understood!
Benchmarks of Quality and Expectations
To assess your school’s creation and implementation of expectations, you can use the
Benchmarks of Quality assessment. While the Benchmarks of Quality goes over vital elements
PBIS implementation, you can use the section on expectations to assess how your school is
creating and implementing them! Here is a brief overview of relevant critical elements of the
Benchmarks of Quality:
TABLE HERE
You can use these guidelines as goalposts when developing and implementing expectations.
Once expectations are created and in place, how do you respond to students when expectations
are met or unmet? You’ll learn more in the very next section! 

Responding to Expectations Through Relationships
How Students Are Reinforced
Knowing how to respond when students meet our expectations and follow the rules, or when
they don’t, can be tricky. Reinforcements are important; they can encourage forming positive
habits or prevent ineffective or unhelpful behaviors from becoming routine. Reinforcements are
needed in everyday life, including school, but understanding how to implement them, however,
is less straight-forward. 
This tension is demonstrated clearly in how teachers' and students' perceive a common form
of reinforcement through PBIS (Llyod et al., 2022; Tidewell, 2022). 
Read through how teachers and students feel about reinforcement systems in the graphic
below! You can enlarge it by clicking on it.
IMAGE HERE
Graphic of students' and teachers' view on reinforcement systems in the classroom
As you can see, the pros or cons of reinforcing through rewards, “cash,” or tokens are divided.
Some of these issues can be tackled, such as ensuring well-rounded, deﬁned training for
teachers on behaviors and attitudes to reward or involving students more closely in the process.
However, this does not address students’ and staff’s motivation to engage in the system, or
how reinforcement can matter to all students. 
There are no easy answers on implementing reinforcements. Nevertheless, there are key
principles to keep in mind that can lessen the diffculties associated with reinforcement
systems. 

Reinforcing Through Relationship
All reinforcements require relationship. Think back on a time in your life when someone, maybe
a parent, teacher, or boss, either corrected or commended your behavior or work. What
difference did the closeness, trust, and respect you had for that person make in how you
perceived their response? If you didn't know the person, their response was most likely just a
nice affrmation or a pesky admonishment. It takes relationship for reinforcements to stick or
to matter.
If your students do not know that they are cared for as people,
regardless of behavior or attitudes, then reinforcements, whether
tangible or verbal, will not impact their motivation and character.
Within schoolwide expectations, what matters in reinforcement is the person responding, not
necessarily the reinforcement itself. Build your relationships with your students so that when
reinforcement or intervention occurs, it matters. A way to build relationships with students can
occur through “5 Minute Chats with Students” from CASEL. 

Keeping Reinforcements Clear
The deﬁnitions for misconduct, reinforcement, and intervention ought to be clearly deﬁned
and well known by staffs and students. An example of a well-outlined dictionary of misconduct
and intervention is found in the attached Behavioral Standards from a school district in
California.
For example, hazing is deﬁned as:
"Any method of initiation into a student organization or group that causes or may cause
physical harm or personal degradation or disgrace resulting in physical or mental harm to
a student."
One of the outlined responses to hazing, as a minimum standard, is an informal conference.
This is clearly deﬁned as:
"A school offfcial (teacher, administrator or counselor) will meet with the student for
instruction & guidance providing reteaching and corrective feedback. This may offer the
student an opportunity to have an understanding of, and be motivated to change, his or
her behavior. A student so involved is more likely to become re-engaged in the process of
learning."
There are multiple examples in the document below that you can use as tools to think through
how you deﬁne behaviors and reactions in your own school.
Having such clear deﬁnitions prevents ambiguity when making decisions about responding to
students. A helpful tool your school may already have, or you can create within your leadership
team is a chart that connects speciﬁc types of misconduct with appropriate responses based on
the action, its severity, ﬁrst time occurrence, or repeated instances.

Equity in Responses
Racial minority students, especially Black students, face far more offce discipline referrals than
their peers. To work against this inequity, data regarding disciplinary action should be
disaggregated by race, gender, ethnicity, and disability to monitor trends. Having clearly deﬁned
expectations for behavior and clearly deﬁned procedures for misconduct further pushes against
bias in disciplinary actions.
For more tips, see the attached 5-Point Intervention Approach for Enhancing Equity in School
Discipline from PBIS. You can ﬁnd additional material on disproportionality in the Core MTSS
Course.
You have covered a broad but important topic in this lesson. The expectations in schools provide
structure for learning to ﬂourish and relationships to grow in a predictable, safe, and
welcoming environment. Let’s return to Dr. Jake Klipsch (See? We did come back to him!) to
hear how you can respond to this new information. 
Academic, behavioral, and positive health and wellbeing
expectations are important because they encompass
distinct parts of our students that collectively create the
whole person.
Creating and implementing schoolwide expectations in Tier 1 is a journey instead of a
destination. It is important that you have a team working alongside you. 

Let's review the lesson.
- Expectations for students and staff are important because they give everyone a
common language to use about academics, behavior, and positive health and
wellbeing.
- Academic expectations are set by South Carolina's Department of Education, while
behavioral and positive health and wellbeing expectations are set by teams within
your school and district.
- Behavioral expectations are three to ﬁve positively stated expectations that have
associated, context-speciﬁc rules.
- Positive health and wellbeing expectations are rooted in curricula and lesson plans
to implement in your school.
- When responding to students who meet or don't meet expectations, focus on the
relationship ﬁrst, have clearly deﬁned responses, and ensure that equity is the
priority.




*****
Building the Foundation with Tier 1- 1.3
Wellness Enhancement for School Staff
Wellness Enhancement for Students

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Wellness Enhancement for School Staff
Outcomes:
1. Describe wellness and some of the challenges to wellness that educators may face
2. Recommend effective supports for districts to prioritize educator wellbeing, reduce
stress, and promote positive school wellness
3. Identify wellness practices that individuals can adopt to increase wellbeing

What is Wellness?
Examining Wellness in the School Setting
A white building with many windows and balconies
Wellness is the act of practicing healthy habits on a daily basis to attain better physical and
mental outcomes. It is the active pursuit of activities, choices, and lifestyles that lead to a state of
holistic health—wellness is not just surviving; it means thriving. 
School wellness is an approach that actively supports the physical, mental, social, and
emotional health of everyone in the school community.
