emotional health of everyone in the school community.
A healthy school has a culture and environment where the importance of health and overall
wellness is visible on the walls and in every classroom—the importance of overall wellness is
supported and promoted in all aspects of the school.
At the Tier 1 level, promoting wellness for all provides a strong foundation to continue building
on.

Components of Educator Wellness
Wellness is important for both educators and students. In this lesson, you will focus on
wellness for educators: teachers, administrators, mental health clinicians, and any other staff
working in a school.
Educator wellness is about the combination of our love for what we do each day, the quality of
our relationships, the security of our ﬁnances, the vibrancy of our physical health, and the pride
we take in what we have contributed to our communities (Rath & Harter, 2014). Most
importantly, it’s about how these dimensions interact.
Click through the images below for more information
about the eight dimensions of educator wellness.

Dimensions of Educator Wellness
Educator wellness can be deﬁned along eight dimensions described by the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA): emotional,
environmental, intellectual, physical, social, spiritual, occupational, and ﬁnancial.
Dimension 1
Emotional
Emotional wellness is the ability to successfully handle life's stresses and adapt to
change and diffcult times (National Institutes of Health, 2022).
Individuals who are emotionally well experience fewer negative emotions and bounce
back from diffculties faster. This quality is called resilience.
Emotional wellness is of major importance in an educator’s daily life because it
affects interactions with students, parents, colleagues, and administrators.
Educators can achieve emotional management and wellness through individual
activities that allow for self-reﬂection and processing as well as maintaining
connections with friends who are active listeners, trusted colleagues, mentors,
coaches, or professionals who are trained in emotional wellness strategies.
Counseling can give the educator a safe space with a neutral party to make sense of
emotions and gain clarity on how to make necessary life adjustments.
Dimension 2
Physical
Educators often feel so extended by the day-to-day demands of their professional
and personal lives that they don’t make time for physical wellness. Educators who
have a depleted sense of physical wellness are more susceptible to physical and
mental illness, which has a direct inﬂuence on attendance, relationships, and capacity
to serve students. In turn, this can have a negative impact on other educators and their
ability to serve students.
Dimension 3
Intellectual
Just like your physical and emotional health, your intellect needs nourishment too!
Intellectual wellbeing is a sense of curiosity, being open to new ideas, thinking
critically, and being an overall lifelong learner. The pursuit of one’s intellectual
passion is essential for educators’ relational and instructional engagement with
students. It helps them stay current with evolving research and follow through with
emerging best practices.
Dimension 4
Environmental
Environmental wellness establishes the physical and mental foundation that grounds
an educator’s work, including the physical and emotional environment. Contributors
to environmental wellness in the school setting include the safety and upkeep of the
building, the culture of staff and students, and the sustainability of practices.
Dimension 5
Social
Social wellness refers to developing a sense of connection, belonging, and a well-
developed support system.
Positive social habits help us build support systems and stay healthier mentally and
physically.
Social wellness provides educators with the foundation for interaction and
participation with and commitment to students, parents, and the community that is
rooted in mutual respect, interdependence, and cooperation (Sackney et al., 2000;
Strout & Howard, 2012).
Dimension 6
Spiritual
Spiritual wellness represents personal beliefs and values and involves having a
purpose and a sense of balance and peace. Spiritual wellness allows educators to ﬁnd
their purpose and passion within the profession, enabling them to serve students
equitably. Spiritual wellness is unique to each individual in how they will cultivate the
understanding to support this dimension. Educators can create the space for
deepening their spiritual wellness by examining individual aspirations and analyzing
recurring patterns through reﬂective journaling, meditation, and introspective
mindfulness.
Dimension 7
Occupational
Occupational wellness includes job satisfaction, the ability to use your talents and
skills at work, and your ambitions for professional growth and change. People with
occupational wellness ﬁnd their work rewarding, have good relationships with co-
workers, and ﬁnd positive ways to handle workplace stress, all while also ﬁnding a
good work-life balance.
Dimension 8
Financial
Financial wellness has a direct effect on educators’ ability to support their life, health,
and mental wellbeing. If an individual is under ﬁnancial stress, this occupies an
overwhelming amount of an individual’s mental capacity, preventing educators from
being fully mindful and critically conscious in their instructional practices and
relationships.

Why is a more intentional focus on school wellness so
important?
Airplane window view
Often, educators put students and families ﬁrst. As educators, after all, the goal is to support
students as much as we can. Sometimes, self-care can feel like it's taking away time from taking
care of others, and it can even feel selﬁsh.
However, personal wellness is needed in order to effectively help others. You may be familiar
with the metaphor of ﬂying on an airplane and being told to put on your oxygen mask ﬁrst
before helping others. This is because if your oxygen mask isn't on, you will be unable to
breathe and provide support to anyone else. You may also be familiar with the phrase "you
cannot pour from an empty cup." Similarly, we cannot be fully present and giving to others if we
are running on empty.
The same concept is true in the school setting: wellness helps educators perform roles more
effectively, ﬁnd more satisfaction at work, and create a positive environment, improving the
experience for educators and students alike.

Barriers to Educator Wellness
While we often acknowledge the importance of wellness, maintaining it is not always easy.
There are many barriers to wellness that professionals in the school setting experience.
According to several studies and reports, teaching is a highly stressful job. For example, the
American Federation of Teachers’ 2017 Educator Quality of Work Life Survey found that 61% of
teachers said their jobs were always or often stressful—more than double the rate of non-
teaching working adults—and 58% said they had poor mental health due to stress levels. That
was before the COVID-19 pandemic hit.
In another study, researchers conducted surveys in January 2022 with public school teachers,
principals, and working adults, asking about the following ﬁve aspects of wellbeing:  
- Frequent job-related stress
- Ability to cope with job-related stress
- Burnout, symptoms of depression
- Resilience to stressful events
The image below depicts the results from the survey. Click to enlarge.
IMAGE HERE
A chart depicting wellbeing survey results
As can be seen from the chart, compared to other working adults, teachers and principals
reported experiencing greater rates of frequent job-related stress, burnout, symptoms of
depression, and not coping well with job-related stress: almost 75% of teachers and 85% of
principals experience frequent job-related stress, compared to 35% of other working adults
(Rand Corp, 2022). Meanwhile, compared to teachers and principals, other working adults
reported experiencing higher resilience.

Resilience:the process and outcome of successfully adapting to difffcult or challenging life
experiences, especially through mental, emotional, and behavioral ffexibility and
adjustment to external and internal demands (American Psychological Association, 2023).
A number of factors contribute to how well people adapt to adversities, predominant
among them:
the ways in which individuals view and engage with the world
the availability and quality of social resources
speciffc coping strategies
What’s going on? Why are educators experiencing such diffculties with their occupation?
Educators love what they do, but some are ﬁnding it harder and harder to "bounce back" from
so many demanding and stressful events. Let's take a closer look at major underlying issues.
“Teaching never stops, says Samantha T., a special
education teacher in West Virginia. "I don’t recall the last
time I got a full lunch break—without behavior check-
ins, a parent phone call, or the extra coverage needed due
to lack of subs. Instead of planning periods, when the bell
rings at 3:30, and students go home, my grading and
planning work is far from ﬁnished”
- NEA.com, 2022

Educators report that their stress is often related to increased job demands—especially around:
- testing and assessments
- challenging student behaviors
- a lack of decision-making power
- insuffcient professional development in social and emotional learning
to support students' needs
These factors, along with other various concerns, can lead to secondary traumatic stress (STS),
burnout, and compassion fatigue. Let's review more about these challenges to wellness in the
tabs below.
Secondary traumatic stress: Secondary traumatic stress (STS) is the emotional distress that results when an individual hears
about the traumatic experiences of another individual. Distress may result from hearing
someone’s trauma stories, seeing high levels of distress in the aftermath of a traumatic event,
retelling a traumatized person's story, and/or seeing photos or images related to the trauma.
Common symptoms of STS include the following (click on image to enlarge):
Burnout: Burnout is characterized by emotional exhaustion and a sense of reduced personal
accomplishment. Burnout has similar symptoms to STS, but can result from other stressors
besides trauma exposure, like feeling overloaded with responsibilities, not having enough time, or
not having enough resources. Click on the image below to enlarge and see warning signs of
educator burnout out.
IMAGE HERE
Compassion Fatigue: A combination of STS and burnout can result in compassion fatigue. Compassion fatigue refers
to occupational exhaustion and stress that results from absorbing the trauma and emotions
associated with helping others. Compassion fatigue can make it diffcult to continue empathizing
with others, cause physical symptoms, and increase the risk of developing mental health
disorders. Review the symptoms of compassion fatigue in the graphic below. Click to enlarge.
IMAGE HERE

How to Support Educator Wellness: Shared Responsibility
Teacher burnout is a problem that can be addressed at the individual and district/school
leadership levels. At the individual level, there’s a range of things that you can do to improve
your own wellbeing, called self-care. Self-care often is, and should be, encouraged: it is
important to consider your own wellbeing and take steps to actively support it. We will review
strategies for self-care later in the lesson. 
However, self-care alone is often not enough to overcome the many challenges faced in the
school setting, many of which may be out of the control of individual educators. It is important
to acknowledge that the responsibility is not solely on educators; self-care may feel like yet
another burden or task to complete. Leadership, both at the district and school levels, plays a
large role in creating environments that impact the wellness of faculty, staff, and students. For
example, decisions about funding allocation, classroom sizes, school policies, and much more
can make a signiﬁcant impact on the school environment and the rate of burnout that teachers
experience.
Because of this, there is a shared responsibility between educators and school leadership in
promoting educator wellness. Leadership can promote policies that facilitate wellness, and
individual educators can take action to support their wellbeing. 
Brandi explains that districts and schools have a responsibility to examine organizational
systems, practices, and policies to identify and organize resources in ways that effectively
promote educator wellness. While individual educators and schools can both make steps
forward in promoting wellness, it is essential that this is done together so that needs are being
appropriately met.
Review the image below for examples of roles that
districts/schools and individuals can play in promoting
wellness.
IMAGER HERE

Best Practices to Support Educator Wellness
Integrating Tier 1 Support at the School Leadership Level
Let's look at teacher wellbeing strategies through an MTSS lens. Your school is already (or is
about to be) invested in MTSS and PBIS to address the academic social, emotional, and
behavioral needs of all students. The PBIS framework also offers an approach to implementing
tiered supports for staff. PBIS promotes a proactive, preventative approach by emphasizing the
use of a continuum of evidence-based social, emotional, and mental health supports. Teams
addressing the mental health and social emotional, and behavioral needs of their students
might also address and support the needs of their staff.
Through this MTSS rationale and the implementation process below, districts can support staff
with varying challenges and needs.
IMAGE HERE
Wellness plan and six-step process

MTSS Action Plan
Using MTSS for educator wellness includes three keyshifts in strategy, collaboration, and data.
1. Shift in Strategy: Focus on universal prevention to promote wellness for all.Start with small,
practical goals and action plan steps that are attainable and make a big impact on overall
wellness 
2. Shift Collaboration: Leadership teams meet regularly and use data and the MTSS to organize
systems, practices, and data enhancements to prioritize wellness for educators and students.
3. Shift in Data Use in Decision-Making: Use large data sets (aggregate) at the universal level to
guide implementation decisions, and make sure the team has appropriate data to promote
wellness for educators and students. Universal data from surveys and focus groups will guide
teams to identify staff needs and develop systems of support.
Universal indicators of wellness include the percentage of staff who feel like they: 
- are connected (within grade level/team and/or school level) 
- are managing their changing role 
- have skills to manage student needs
- can manage their current workload 
- have a voice at the table with school, district, state
are appreciated by students, families, administration, central offce
Seeking Feedback
Feedback is a great way to identify opportunities to provide immediate and future support. To get
educator feedback,a systematicteacher and staff assessment process can help districts and
schools identify areas to improve wellness and reduce stress to ultimately promote success for
all.
Within the MTSS, districts can do these ﬁve things:
1. Establish a clear process and system for collecting, analyzing, and storing data 
2. Conduct wellbeing assessments with teachers and all school staff 
3. Assess staff wellbeing regularly(at least annually)
4. Ensure privacy of information and anonymity when assessing staff wellbeing
5. Assess a range of wellbeing components that address each of the eight dimensions
of wellness

Districts can obtain valuable insight into educator needs by using one-on-one interviews
and/or:
School-Based Surveys –
When using scale-based surveys, select a measurement tool that is valid and reliable and that is
connected to the outcomes you are striving to measure. For example, some tools speciﬁcally
measure things like work-related stress levels, and some tools may focus on other aspects of
wellbeing, like connectedness and teacher effcacy. Examples of tools to measure work-related
dimensions are listed below and include links to the websites.
1. Resilience at Work Scale(RAW), is a 25-item scale intended to capture “resilience
promoting” behaviors and measure the way individuals manage the pressures of work
(Winwood et al., 2013). RAW measures seven aspects of workplace resilience (which are
teachable) and helps to expand opportunities to provide support and nurture employee
resilience.
2. Professional Quality of Life (PROQOL): Includes 30 items to assess compassion satisfaction
and fatigue. Click here for the free complete questionnaire.
3. Health-Related Quality of Life:Developed by the CDC, the HRQOL has 4 questions in the
Healthy Days Core Module and 10 additional questions about activity limitations and healthy
days symptoms. HRQOL is an individual’s or a group’s perceived physical and mental health
over time.
4. Teacher Subjective Well-Being Questionnaire: The Teacher Subjective Wellbeing
Questionnaire is an 8-item self-report rating scales for measuring teachers' job-speciﬁc
wellbeing. It's comprised of two subscales: (1) School Connectedness and (2) Teaching
Effcacy. Subscale scores can be used a standalone wellbeing indicators or summed to create
an Overall Teacher Subjective Wellbeing composite score.

Focus Groups –
A focus group is an information-gathering tool where a selected group of 6-12 people have a
focused discussion on a particular topic. This discussion is guided by a school staff member
acting as a facilitator who asks up to 12 questions. The discussion lasts for 40–80 minutes. A
record keeper documents issues and views raised. School policy regarding data protection should
be adhered to when recording discussions. Generally focus groups meet once only. 

Using measurement tools, schools and districts can build an understanding of teachers'
professional experiences in a number of areas. By gathering educator perceptions of their
wellness, schools can assess the quality of the work environment and develop targeted
programs and professional development that address wellbeing and job satisfaction.
Review the graphic below for components of the teacher
experiences that these surveys may measure.
IMAGE HERE
Graphic listing areas that can be measured to help schools and districts understand
teacher experiences

When districts and school systems engage in the educator wellness assessment processes it is
important to remember these key facts:
- There is no one right way to measure wellness. Use what you know about your context to inform your choice.
- Your resources will affect how often you measure.
- Each measure should be focused on an aspect of wellbeing that you can inﬂuence through interventions.
- Be prepared to act on what you learn.
- Use results from multiple measures to get as much information as possible.
Also, when using a tool, such as a survey or interview protocol, communicate a clear goal to
participants, share how results may be used, and provide a process for protecting
conﬁdentiality. These practices may increase participant trust and willingness to share their
experiences. And as a reminder:
- Consider the purpose of each measure
- Choose a tool that is considerate of your workplace and community culture
- Align staff wellness improvement efforts with needs identiﬁed by your staff wellbeing assessment
- Integrate wellness activities into the school culture instead of after-school activities
When conducting wellbeing assessments, districts must consider the goal, scale, and length of
the survey during the planning process. Open communication with educators and diligent
collection of data on teachers’ professional concerns allows school and district leaders to more
accurately identify and address the root causes of teachers’ stress and dissatisfaction.
For a review of wellness measures that provide districts with an organized view of instruments,
dimensions, and an accompanying glossary, download the PDF titled "Wellbeing Measures."
Wellbeing Measures.pdf
TAKE A LOOK

Taking Action: Applying Educator Feedback
Once data is collected, schools and districts have many options for wellness initiatives. There
are a variety of options to choose from, so it is essential to tie practices back to the input of
educators and what will best serve the needs of each speciﬁc community. In this section, we will
review some of these options.
Wellness Rooms
An example of a school-basedwellness room for staff and students.
Wellness roomsprovide a calming and restorative space for teachers and staff to practice
mindfulness and self-care during breaks. Ideally, these rooms remove offce equipment or
work-related supplies and foster community building, healthy eating, and relaxation. For
example, wellness rooms may include a large table to encourage staff to eat together and
converse or a wall of photos highlighting staff engaging in group outings and healthy activities.
It should be noted that some teachers disagree with creating wellness rooms and believe they
send negative messages (e.g., teaching is so stressful and taxing that teachers need a
therapeutic space to perform their job). Click here to read about one company that supports the
design of educator wellness rooms.

Mindfulness-Based Interventions and Professional Development (PD)
Mindfulness-based interventions and PD effectively reduce stress and teacher burnout by
developing staff members’ mental health tools and practices.
Providing opportunities for professional development in mindfulness is a great way districts can
support educator wellness.
Below are three mindfulness-based professional development programs that demonstrate
effectiveness in supporting educator wellness: Cultivating Awareness and Resilience in
Education (CARE), Community Approach to Learning Mindfully (CALM), and Stress
Management and Relaxation Techniques (SMART) in Education.
Cultivating Awareness and Resilience in Education (CARE). CARE is a 3-4-day professional
development program that helps teachers handle the stresses and rediscover the joys of
teaching. CARE offers teachers and administrators tools and resources for reducing stress,
preventing burnout, enlivening teaching and helping students thrive socially, emotionally and
academically. This program has been carefully studied in a series of randomized trials showing
its effectiveness in boosting teacher’s mental capacities, performance, and social and emotional
functioning which results in more rewarding personal and professional experiences.
CARE can be provided:
- face-to-face at local school districts (a series of days across the school year)
- as a series of shorter workshops across the school year.
- yearly at the Garrison Institute (a four-day retreat model).
CARE can be tailored to the needs of your school or district.
Community Approach to Learning Mindfully (CALM). CALM is an evidence-based program that
provides space and time to support educators daily wellbeing mindfully. Educators are trained to
engage in daily CALM sessions before the school day begins that last about 20 minutes and
provide intentional breathing practices, gentle yoga movement, mindful awareness practices,
and setting positive intentions for the teaching day. CALM was associated with improvements in
mindfulness, emotional functioning, positive affect, distress tolerance, blood pressure, cortisol,
and effcacy in classroom management (Harris, et al., 2016).
Stress Management and Relaxation Techniques in Education (SMART). SMART focuses on
supporting the mental, emotional, and physical wellbeing of educators through the cultivation
of emotional competencies, self-compassion, and mindfulness. The 20-hour evidence-based
personal renewal program is designed especially for adults working in ECE-12 education. Over
ten weeks, participants attend two-hour weekly sessions that include presentations,
discussion, and experiential activities involving movement, emotional awareness, and
meditation. Educators who have completed the program reported decreased stress, anxiety,
depression and burnout, and increased working memory capacity, greater mindfulness and
levels of self-compassion, and more focused attention (Roeser, et al., 2013).
Teachers can improve communication, classroom management, and student learning by
expanding and implementing mindfulness practice through these or other training programs.

Wellness Groups
Cohorts of wellness groups support teacher and staff mental health through peer consultation
groups and group therapy interventions. Districts may support wellness groups by matching
each group with a third-party facilitator or having a staff member receive training to lead
conversations. For example:
Happy Teacher Revolutionsupports the mental health and wellness of teachers. They provide
training to initiate teacher support group meetings in communities around the country. During
these optional group meetings, participants may practice mindfulness, eat healthy meals
together, engage in physical activities or sports, or discuss successes, challenges, and
experiences. The resource also helps districts provide group therapy opportunities for staff interested
in more structured Tier 2 support.

Self-Care and Beyond
Individual Strategies for Improving Wellness
Now that we have reviewed the school/district level initiatives for improving wellness, let's
discuss some strategies that educators can apply to improve their personal wellness. When
reviewing these strategies, it is important to note that not every strategy will work for every
person–resources, schedules, and personal needs make a signiﬁcant difference in what
approaches will work best. Make sure to individualize your own personal wellness plan based on
your own strengths, resources, and needs!
Emotional Intelligence as a Tool for Wellness
Emotional intelligence (otherwise known as emotional quotient or EQ) is the ability to
understand, use, and manage your own emotions in positive ways to relieve stress,
communicate effectively, empathize with others, overcome challenges, and defuse conﬂict.
Emotional intelligence can help promote wellness by positively impacting relationships with
others, effectiveness at work, awareness of and management of emotions, and overall
wellbeing. Understanding emotional intelligence, and working to improve skills, can help
address some challenges in the school setting.
According to Daniel Goleman, an American psychologist
and author of the groundbreaking book, “Emotional
Intelligence,” (sometimes referred to as EI or EQ) has ffve
key elements:
Self-Awareness-The ability to recognize and understand your own emotions is a critical part of emotional
intelligence. Beyond just recognizing your emotions, however, is being aware of the effect of
your actions, moods, and emotions on other people. To become self-aware, you must be
capable of monitoring your own emotions, recognizing different emotional reactions, and
then correctly identifying each particular emotion. Self-aware individuals also recognize the
relationships between the things they feel and how they behave.
Self-Regulation-This is the ability to regulate and manage your emotions, which is not to say you are putting
emotions on lockdown and hiding your true feelings. It simply means waiting for the right
time and place to express them. Self-regulation is all about expressing your emotions
appropriately. Those who are skilled in self-regulation tend to be ﬂexible and adapt well to
change. They are also good at managing conﬂict and diffusing tense or diffcult situations.
Motivation-Intrinsic motivation also plays a key role in emotional intelligence. People who are
emotionally intelligent are motivated by things beyond external rewards like fame, money,
recognition, and acclaim. Instead, they have a passion to fulﬁll their own inner needs and
goals. They seek internal rewards, experience ﬂow from being totally in tune with an activity
and pursue peak experiences.
Empathy-Being empathetic—or having the ability to understand how others are feeling—is absolutely
crucial to emotional intelligence. But it involves more than just being able to recognize the
emotional states of others. It also involves your responses to people based on this
information. When you sense that someone is feeling bad, depressed, or disheartened, how
do you respond? You might treat them with extra care and concern, or you might try to lift
their spirits.
Social Skills-Being able to interact well with others is another important aspect of emotional intelligence.
True emotional understanding involves more than just consideration of your own emotions
and those of others. You also need to be able to put this information to work in your daily
interactions and communications. In professional settings, managers beneﬁt by being able
to build relationships and connections with employees. Workers beneﬁt from being able to
develop a strong rapport with leaders and co-workers. Important social skills include active
listening, verbal communication skills, nonverbal communication skills, leadership, and
persuasiveness.
Remember, emotional intelligence helps you build stronger relationships, succeed in your
workplace, and achieve your career and personal goals. It can also help you to connect with your
feelings, turn intention into action, and make informed decisions about what matters most to
you. Emotional intelligence affects:
1. Your performance at work.High emotional intelligence can
help you navigate the social complexities of the workplace,
lead and motivate others, and excel in your career.
Your physical health. If you're unable to manage your emotions, you are probably
not managing your stress either. This can lead to serious health problems.
Uncontrolled stress raises blood pressure, suppresses the immune system,
increases the risk of heart attacks and strokes, contributes to infertility, and speeds
up the aging process. The ﬁrst step to improving emotional intelligence is to learn
how to manage stress.
2. Your mental health. Uncontrolled emotions and stress can also impact your mental
health, making you vulnerable to anxiety and depression. If you are unable to
understand, get comfortable with, or manage your emotions, you'll also struggle to
form strong relationships. This in turn can leave you feeling lonely and isolated and
further exacerbate mental health problems.
3. Your relationships. By understanding your emotions and how to control them,
you're better able to express how you feel and understand how others are feeling.
This allows you to communicate more effectively and forge stronger relationships,
both at work and in your personal life.
4. Your social intelligence. Being in tune with your emotions serves a social purpose,
connecting you to other people and the world around you. Social intelligence
enables you to reduce stress and balance your nervous system through social
communication, and connection with others.
Knowledge of emotional intelligence and the ability to positively act on it are not the same. It's
important to remember that there is a difference between having knowledge and consciously
applying that knowledge to your life. Even though you know, being stressed and overwhelmed
can override your ability to act on your knowledge. In order to consistently engage your
awareness in ways that stand up under pressure, you can develop or enhance the skills to
overcome stress in the moment.
By enhancing emotional intelligence, each educator can become more productive and
successful at what they do, and help students become more productive and successful too!
The way teachers shape and handle their own feelings and
those of their learners is central to the success of learning.
Alan Mortiboys, Teaching with Emotional Intelligence
If you would like to explore strengthening your
emotional intelligence, click the link and download the
resource provided below.
13 Emotional Intelligence Activities, Exercises & PDFs
This piece offers a useful next step for anyone interested in enhancing their
emotional intelligence activities and need a plan for improving their own EI.
READ MORE POSITIVEPSYCHOLOGY.COM 
Understanding and Developing Emotional Intelligence.pdf
200 KB

Self-Care Activities
Because every person’s schedule and speciﬁc needs are different, practicing self-care can look
different for everyone. A list of self-care activities for teachers could include the following
ideas:
-Take a 10-20 minute break each day for just yourself
-Provide positive affrmations to increase conﬁdence and improve self-image
-Bring a self-care "emergency pack" to school with things you enjoy so you can destress during your break if needed
-Use journals or writing to help recognize and process emotions
-Take a 20-30 minute walk or participate in other physical activities
-Apply mindfulness strategies, such as meditation
-Utilize social support from colleagues, friends, family, and signiﬁcant others
The National Education Association developed Put on Your Own Oxygen Mask First: Cultivating
Healing and Wellbeing in Ourselves,a 7-part series about reconnecting and recharging as
foundational for humanizing your work and precursors to teaching and learning whether that
be with kids or adults. To access part 1 of this series provided by the South Carolina Education
Association (SCEA), click the link below. You can navigate through the site to view all 7 parts
along with tons of other useful resources!
Put on Your Own Oxygen Mask First: Cultivating Healing and Wellbeing in
Ourselves (Part 1) | The SCEA
Put on Your Own Oxygen Mask First: Cultivating
Healing and Wellbeing in Ourselves (Part 1) | The SCEA
Reconnecting and recharging are foundational for humanizing our work and
precursors to teaching and learning whether that be with kids or adults.
READ MORE THESCEA 

Building Positive Relationships
Friends having coffee
It's all about connection.
Developing positive relationships with colleagues can also be rewarding. Teachers who report
positive connections with their colleagues have a sense of belonging and shared commitment.
In addition, according to Greater Good in Education (2022), teachers with strong connections:
say that their colleagues respect and trust each other
see their coworkers as accepting and encouraging, as well as
collaborative and supportive of each other’s success
feel that they can communicate openly with colleagues and go to them
for help if needed
Follow the link below for a list of strategies for building
positive relationships with colleagues.
Building Positive Relationships with Fellow Educators | NEA
Building Positive Relationships with Fellow Educators |
NEA
Simple steps to creating a more positive work environment.
READ MORE NEA 
Practicing self-care, being consciously aware of your
emotions, and building strong relationships are effective
ways you can promote your own wellness. Lastly and
arguably most importantly, you have to set boundaries.
Here are some tips from ResilientEducator.com:
Set Boundaries to Protect Your Peace
The time has come to put yourself ﬁrst. Teaching is a calling of the heart, but your
physical and mental wellbeing shouldn’t have to suffer to follow your passion. But
creating boundaries can be very hard. Here are just a few "doable" tips to assist with
creating boundaries.
Tip 1 Stick to a ffnite grading time.
It’s easy to lose hours to schoolwork, but too much time spent grading can lead to
burnout faster for you and less quality feedback for your students. Your mind gets
tired and you can become agitated. Feedback is important but, if it’s not quality,
there’s no point in getting it back quickly. Block out a couple of hours to work. And do
your work. However, when the time is up, wrap it up. Stick to that time frame.
On those rare nights when you ﬁnd yourself with less work to do, get ahead. Put
together those lesson plans for next week, or the week after. Stay on track and stay
consistent, but stay within a time limit.
Tip 2 Schedule student help hours
Determine a set schedule and encourage your students to come to you during those
times for help or questions.
Post the times you are free during the day and available after school to provide
support and guidance to your students. Let parents know that this is a good time for
phone calls or emails with a letter home and post on your school’s website.
Scheduling speciﬁc times in advance will ease the mind of your students and parents
while encouraging them to seek out your help.
Tip 3 Take non-negotiable breaks
Find time for yourself in your day and protect that like a mama bear guarding her
cubs.
A break will help you tackle the rest of the day.
Make your lunch adults-only
Choose one of your planning periods to be alone
Close your classroom door, go to the break room, or take a walk
It is important to do whatever is going to give you a break from the hectic nature of
the day. Some of these options may not be feasible everywhere; that’s totally okay!
What is important is to ﬁnd some time with yourself, or with other adults, in whatever
way works for you.


Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- Wellness refers to the health and wellbeing of everyone involved in the school
setting. Beyond the absence of health and other disorders or challenges, wellness
involves proactively thriving in your environment
- Prioritizing wellness makes educators more likely to stay in the profession,
increases quality of life, and, ultimately, makes a stronger school system
- Educators face many challenges in achieving wellness, and many strategies at the
leadership/policy level and at the individual level can help promote wellness
- Wellness strategies at the leadership level include regularly seeking and using
feedback from educators through surveys and/or focus groups, integrating
wellness activities, such as meditation, and using a tiered approach
- Wellness strategies at the individual level include using emotional intelligence
skills, engaging in self-care activities, and building strong relationships





@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Wellness Enhancement for Students
Outcomes:
1. Describe the ways in which Tier 1 can support student wellness
2. Examine physical wellness for students, including nutrition and physical activity
3. Examine emotional wellness and mental health promotion strategies for students

Supporting Student Wellness
Improving Wellness for All
Like the adults in the building, children coming to school also need to have their wellness
attended to.
To promote student wellness, schools, districts, and educational professionals must ﬁrst
recognize that there are many factors that impact a student’s academic attainment.
A healthy and supportive school environment helps children and adolescents develop the skills
they need to recognize and manage emotions, set and achieve positive goals, appreciate the
perspectives of others, establish and maintain positive relationships, and make responsible
decisions (CDC, Healthy Schools 2022).
School districts can help create a healthier generation by taking steps to promote proper
nutrition, physical health, and mental health.
Schools offer an important setting to educate students on the importance of a healthy mind
and body as part of the total learning experience and to encourage healthy behaviors that last
a lifetime.

Components of Student Wellness
Before looking at what schools can do to promote wellness in detail, let's examine the different
components of student wellness. Some of these components may be similar to the eight
dimensions of educator wellness discussed in the "Educator Wellness" lesson.
The Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child Model, WSCC, is a framework for
addressing wellness in schools that describes ten components for supporting student wellness.
The WSCC model is student-centered and emphasizes the role of the community in supporting
the school, the connections between health and academic achievement, and the importance of
evidence-based school policies and practices. The ten components include:
1. Family Engagement: Family engagement is critical to student success and wellbeing. For more information on family
engagement, review our "Elevating Family and Student Engagement" lessons!
2. Community Involvement: Communities and schools can work together to promote wellness for students. Community organizations,
such as volunteer groups, libraries, local businesses, and others, can partner with schools for initiatives
and activities that enhance the strength of the community and support student wellness.
3. Employee Wellness: The wellness of educators and other school staff is essential for creating a healthy environment. Educators
who are well can serve as role models for students, are more likely to find satisfaction with and stay in the
profession and enhance the quality of education that students receive. For more information on employee
wellness, review Part 1 of this lesson!
4. Counseling, Psychological, and Social Services: It is essential for schools to promote access to counseling, psychological, and social services in order for all students to thrive. Students and educators may need assessments, treatment, or interventions, and
providing access to these services helps promote wellbeing for all.
5. Health Services: Similar to counseling, psychological, and social services, providing access to health services is essential in
promoting wellbeing for all. Prevention and intervention for medical concerns, intervention in emergency
situations, and other services help improve wellbeing.
6. Physical Environment: The physical environment of the school can make a big difference in the sense of safety and comfort that
students and educators feel. A comfortable and safe environment enhances mental health and wellbeing.
7. Social and Emotional Climate: The climate of a school is essential in promoting and supporting wellbeing. Positive school cultures
promote wellness, increase feelings of connectedness in the community, and improve mental health. For
more information on creating positive school climates, review our "School Climate and Safety
Enhancement" lesson.
8. Health Education: Health education is essential to provide students to foster their independence and help them make
informed and healthy decisions. High-quality health education empowers students to build healthy habits
that last for a lifetime.
9. Nutrition Environment and Services: Nutrition is another component of overall health and wellbeing. Nutrition services in a school can include
providing healthy meals, providing education about nutrition, and building a positive culture that
promotes healthy nutrition choices.
10. Physical Education and Physical Activity: Physical education and physical activity are also huge contributors to student wellness. Providing access to physical education, recess, and sports teams can promote a lifelong love of physical activity that supports
health and wellness.

Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child
(WSCC)
The Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child, or WSCC model, is CDC's
framework for addressing health in schools. The WSCC model is student-
centered and emphasizes the role of the community in supporting the school,
the connections between health and academic achievement and the importance
of evidence-based school policies and practices.
READ MORE CDC 
In South Carolina, school districts can participate in the Medical University of South Carolina
Boeing Center for Children's Wellness (MUSC BCCW).
The MUSC BCCW School-Based Wellness Initiative works to create a culture of wellness by
providing direct support and motivation for K-12 schools and districts. The Initiative is
designed to engage the school community in creating a healthy learning environment;
supporting schools in the implementation of evidence-based policy, system, and
environmental strategies at the population level targeting improved nutrition, increased
physical activity, enhanced social and emotional wellness for both students and staff. 19
districts and 204 schools participated in this School-based Wellness Initiative during the 2021–
2022 school year!
Follow the link and download the PDF below to explore
the Boeing Center for Children's Wellness.
Our Initiatives
The MUSC Boeing Center for Children's Wellness works in partnership with
schools and school districts to build a culture of wellness.
READ MORE MUSCKIDS 
FINAL 2022 BCCW Impact Report.pdf
5.2 MB

Physical Health and Wellbeing
Strategies for Promoting Healthy Habits for Student Wellness
Physical health is critical to the wellness of students in the school building. Physical health can
be addressed through the components of WSCC involving nutrition, physical activity, health
services, and health education. In this section, we will review how to address these wellness
components and provide resources for school implementation.
“A healthy outside starts from the inside.”
- Robert Urich -
Nutrition
Cartoon image of students in school lunch cafeteria
In 1946, the National School Lunch Program (NSLP) was created by Congress in the National
School Lunch Act. In the Act, Congress declared the program a "measure of National Security to
safeguard the health and well-being of the Nation’s children."
Nutrition was and continues to be an important focus for schools because it is one of the
bedrocks of students' physical and mental wellness and academic engagement.
Getting healthy meals and snacks helps students show up ready to learn!
"Every student has the potential to do well in school.
Failing to provide good nutrition puts them at risk of
missing out on meeting that potential. However, taking
action today to provide healthier choices in schools can
help to set students up for a successful future full of
possibilities."-David Just, PhD, Cornell Center for Behavioral Economics in Child Nutrition Programs

Food Insecurity
Federal and state policies regarding nutrition standards for schools are in place. Food assistance
programs help reimburse school meals for children of low-income families, such as the School
Breakfast Program, Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP), National School Lunch
Program, and Summer Food Service Program. Providing nutritious meals and snacks can help
students retain the information they learned during the school day.
IMAGE HERE
Image of an arrow depicting the degrees of food insecurity; adult and child ﬁgures at
each degree.
But even with these programs in place, many students do not qualify for
food assistance programs, even though they live in households that have
trouble affording nutritious food.
Food insecurity is the limited or uncertain availability of nutritionally
adequate and safe foods, or the limited or uncertain ability to acquire
acceptable foods in socially acceptable ways. More than one quarter of
families with food insecurity are not eligible for federal aid, leaving
them with few options for healthy food.
Research by Tufts University School of Nutrition and numerous other studies over the past
decades show that hungry children do not learn effectively and that even mild malnutrition can
impair physical and cognitive growth.
In addition to negative cognitive effects, hunger often results in emotional and social
diffculties. It is quite simple: the negative effects of childhood food insecurity translate to more
frequent illnesses, behavior issues, and poor academics. Access to healthy nutritious meals
positively affects children’s health and learning. Once children reach school age, they spend
more of their waking hours in school than in any other environment. This makes schools
essential to helping students meet their nutritional needs.
"All children should have a healthy meal. If children eat, they
learn better.""-Katrina Shealy, South Carolina Senator

Nutrition Education
Along with providing healthy nutritious meals for all students, schools can make nutrition
education part of universal practices. Students can learn good eating habits in school just like
they learn other academic skills.
Scroll through the carousel below to review steps
schools can take to promote nutrition awareness and
healthier behaviors.
Nutrition Awareness
IMAGE HERE
Providing information about nutrition empowers children with the knowledge and
skills to make healthy food and beverage choices. Nutrition awareness is part of a
well-rounded health education curriculum but can also be included in other classes
and incorporated throughout the school. Schools can tailor nutrition programs for
their environment, daily schedules, and available resources.
Strategy 1:
In the classroom
Nutrition education can happen as a speciﬁcally focused course or lesson in the
classroom, but it can also be incorporated into everyday lessons. Some examples of
this include:
counting with pictures of fruits and vegetables
learning fractions by measuring ingredients for a recipe
examining how plants grow
learning about cultural food traditions
Strategy 2:
Farm-to-school
Farm-to-school programs vary in each school or district, but often include one or
more of the following strategies:
purchasing and serving local or regionally produced foods in the school meal
programs
educating students about agriculture, food, health, and nutrition
engaging students in hands-on learning opportunities through gardening,
cooking lessons, or farm ﬁeld trips
Students who participate in farm-to-school activities increase their knowledge about
nutrition and agriculture, are more willing to try new foods, and consume more fruits
and vegetables. Click here for information on South Carolina Farm-to-School
resources.
Strategy 3:
Plant a school garden
School gardens can provide with students hands-on experience and enhance their
education in many ways.
Students can prepare the soil for the garden, plant seeds, harvest fruits and
vegetables, and taste the food from the garden. Produce from school gardens can be
incorporated into school meals or taste tests. Classroom teachers can teach lessons in
math, science, history, and language arts using the school garden. Click here for a
school garden fact sheet.
Strategy 4
In the cafeteria
Cafeterias are where students eat, so it is important to utilize them to promote
healthy choices. Schools can offer healthy choices in the cafeteria, use signs and
decorations to promote nutrition education, and build a positive culture around
eating.
The Smart Snacks in Schoolnutrition standards support better health for our kids and
echo the good work already taking place in schools across the country.
Other Opportunities:
Nutrition education can also be incorporated outside of the cafeteria and mealtimes.
Positive messages about nutrition can be provided through:
morning announcements
school assemblies
materials sent home to parents and guardians
staff meetings
parent-teacher group meetings
These strategies can help reinforce messages about good nutrition and help ensure
that students see and hear consistent information about healthy eating across the
school campus and at home.

Physical Activity
Like good nutrition, physical activity can have a positive impact on academic performance.
Physical wellnessis a person's ability to learn and model healthy practices and routines. It is
being able to care for your body by consistently making healthy choices.
When a person is physically well, they exhibit:
attentiveness and alertness
positive interpersonal relationships
increased engagement
Review the image below for more information on the beneffts of physical activity.
IMAGE HERE
Infographic of statistics promoting the role of schools in physical activity
The American Pediatric Associate recommends that elementary and middle school students get
at least 60 minutes of physical activity most days, including vigorous activities (such as
swimming, running, or other high-intensity exercises) three days a week.
It is also very important for students to be educated about physical wellbeing not only to
maintain or improve their health but to create behaviors that will last into adulthood.
Physical Activity Challenges
The beneﬁts of physical activity are clear, but sometimes it can still be challenging to promote
or participate in physical activities. Unlike a few decades ago, children and adolescents today are
leading increasingly sedentary lifestyles. Time spent on computers, smart phones, tablets and
binge-watching television have often taken the place of physical exercise.
Health conditions, such as abnormal blood sugar and high cholesterol, were once rare in
children. But in a recent study, about two-thirds of American high school students already had
at least one of those conditions (National Institute of Health, 2022).
Also, lack of physical activity, especially in young people, has the potential to exacerbate existing
health disparities affecting socially vulnerable populations (Berkley Public Health, 2022). 
Regular physical activity can help improve cardiorespiratory ﬁtness, build strong bones and
muscles, control weight, reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression, and reduce the risk of
developing health conditions such as:
heart disease
cancer
type 2 diabetes
high blood pressure
osteoporosis
obesity 

Childhood obesity is a serious problem in the United States, putting children and
adolescents at risk for poor health. Obesity prevalence among children and adolescents is
too high. Children with obesity are more likely to suffer from anxiety, depression, and low
self-esteem.
The Centers for Disease and Control (CDC) (2021) reported that for children and
adolescents aged 2-19 years in 2017-2020:
The prevalence of obesity was 19.7% and affected about 14.7 million children and
adolescents
Obesity prevalence was 12.7% among 2- to 5-year-olds, 20.7% among 6- to 11-
year-olds, and 22.2% among 12- to 19-year-olds
Obesity-related conditions include high blood pressure, high cholesterol, type 2
diabetes, breathing problems such as asthma and sleep apnea, and joint problems
By increasing students’ physical activity and physical
education, schools can help reduce the prevalence of
these conditions and signiffcantly improve academic
achievement and classroom behavior.Review the PDF
below for tips for promoting physical health.
Tips for Teachers.pdf
3.5 MB
Additional Resources
Brain Breaks
Taking "brain breaks" and being physically active in the classroom can help reset our minds
and bodies when we’re feeling unfocused and allow us to get back to work. Try allowing
students to take a moment to do some jumping jacks, go for a quick walk, or stand and do
breathing exercises. Giving individuals or groups of students an opportunity to take a brain
break during the school day can replenish attention, motivation, and energy levels needed to
keep learning. 5 minutes is all it takes!
Check out the video below for an example Brain Break!
Brain Breaks - Action Songs for Children - Move and Freeze - Kids ……
Brain Breaks - Action Songs for Children - Move and Freeze - Kids 
Coordinated Approach to Child Health (CATCH)
The Coordinated Approach to Child Health,CATCH, promotes physical activity and healthy food
choices for children from preschool through eighth grade.
The program also includes the CATCH Coordination Kit which provides a step-by-step guide for
increasing collaboration between school administrators, teachers, nutrition staff, parents, and
community constituents to deliver coordinated health messages across children's learning
environments and afterschool settings.

The Alliance for a Healthier Generation
The Alliance for a Healthier Generation works with schools, youth-serving organizations,
businesses, and communities to support kids in developing lifelong healthy habits by ensuring
the environments that surround them provide and promote good health. The organization
developed the Healthy Schools Programwhich provides no-cost wellness supports for school
districts across the country. Watch this short video from the Alliance that perfectly sums up the
big picture of why nutrition and physical health are so important to overall wellness.


Mental Health and Wellness
Improving Wellness for Social and Emotional Health
We can all agree that nutrition and physical health are vital wellness factors in a student’s ability
to learn. Healthy children learn better (Basch, 2010). 
Another critical component of wellness is a child’s mental health–social, emotional, and
behavioral wellbeing is vital for their ability to engage, self-regulate, problem solve, and learn.
We recognize that mental health is equally as important as nutrition and physical health, and
that these inﬂuence each other. Unfortunately, when a student seems sad or irritable, not
interested in the activities they used to enjoy, many adults may tend to think of it as a typical
phase—that the student will “get over it” eventually. Although most children and adolescents
do experience bad days from time to time, sometimes there could be more to the story.
If you took the “All Hands on Deck” course, you learned that mental health can affect physical
health and behavior and untreated mental health challenges interfere with learning,
socialization, and self-esteem. This can lead to other problems with lifelong repercussions. For
some children, untreated mental health problems can lead to harming others or self-harm.
The current climate suggests the immediate need to enhance (expedite) and prioritize students'
positive mental health and wellness with more effective universal practices and intervention
strategies for all students embedded into the learning culture. We must treat wellness as a
school subject that is just as important as reading and math!

Youth Mental Health Challenges
In the fall of 2021, the American Academy of Pediatrics along with the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and the Children’s Hospital Association declared a national
emergency in child and adolescent mental health. This worsening mental health crisis is
undeniably tied to stress brought on by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, with
the ongoing, seemingly daily, prevalence of social violence and struggles for justice, equity, and
inclusion—trends were observed to be accelerating prior to 2020. Not surprisingly, children and
adolescents are stressed out!
"The ﬁrst step in solving a problem is to recognize that it does exist.""- Zig Ziglar

Student Stressors
Aligning support with student needs within the tiered approach of the MTSS framework
promotes personalization, targeted intervention, effcient resource allocation, preventive and
early intervention, student engagement, and a positive school climate. By understanding and
responding to the unique needs of students, educators can provide the right support at the right
time, maximizing student success and well-being. Let's review some of the common stressors
that students might have on their minds.
- School demands: school itself is a stressor for 83% of teens (APA, 2017). This
involves school exams, preparing to apply to college, pressure to succeed, and
more.
- Negative self-image: students may struggle with their body image, especially as
they are in late childhood and early adolescence, a major transitional period
accompanied by body-related changes. These concerns can increase the risk of
developing mental health concerns, like depression, anxiety, and eating disorders
- Social issues: Making and maintaining friendships can also be challenging.
Bullying, peer pressure, and negative relationships can damage students' self-
esteem and lead to isolation.
- Environmental Stressors: students experience stressors in their home
environments as well. Students may experience stressors from family ﬁnances,
changes (like moving, divorce, or starting a new school), living with chronically ill
or mentally ill family members, diffculties with siblings or other family members,
grief from the loss of people close to them, and many other situations.
The typical challenges that students face in high school continue as they always have, but it is
evident that stressors have grown more complicated. While some students can handle high-
pressure school environments, others report feeling chronically stressed, overworked, and
sleep deprived. 

Types of Stress
As you can see from the section above, there are diverse stressors that students may experience.
Stress can be further categorized into three different categories: positive stress, tolerable stress,
and toxic stress.
- Positive stress: While "stress" sounds scary, a low level of stress is normal - this is
called positive stress. Positive stress results in temporary activation of the body's
stress response system, causing increases in heart rate and stress hormones. For
example, a student might be nervous before their ﬁrst day of school and experience
"butterﬂies" in their stomach before they go into the classroom.
- Tolerable stress: This is the next level of stress. Tolerable stress results from
stressful, impactful events, such as the death of a loved one, natural disasters, or
injuries. This level of stress may activate the stress response system for a short
period of time, but the body goes back to "normal" and recovers, especially with the
support of relationships and other healthy coping mechanisms.
- Toxic stress: This type of stress involves intense, prolonged activation of the stress
response system and can lead to long-lasting "wear-and-tear" on the body and
brain.Toxic stress experienced in childhood (ages 0–17 years) is referred to as
adverse childhood experiences or ACEs. These experiences are very common: nearly
two-thirds of adults report having experienced at least one ACE during childhood
(CDC, 2023).ACEs have been linked to chronic health problems, mental illness, and
substance abuse as children grow to become adults. ACEs can also negatively impact
education and job opportunities, but, fortunately, with the right support and
positive relationships, students can recover from ACEs.
To review common ACEs, view the chart below. Click to
enlarge.
IMAGE HERE
Infographic of types of adverse childhood experiences (CDC, 2015)

Mental Health Concerns
Many of our teens continue to experience a decline in mental health
—rising anxiety, depression, withdrawal, aggression, resulting in
poor coping skills such as drug and/or alcohol use and suicidal
ideation.
According to a 2019 Pew Research Poll, 70% of teens surveyed agree
that anxiety and depression are major problems among peers. Click
to enlarge the image for more of the poll details.
IMAGE HERE
Graph indicating % of teens reporting major problems. Categories include anxiety &
depression, bullying, drug addiction, drinking alcohol, and poverty.
Some teens experiencing high levels of stress and anxiety are simply without the
necessary support and resources to cope. Emergency room visits for self-infficted,
nonfatal injuries among children and young adults increased by 5.7% from 2008 to
2015. The CDC found that between 2007 and 2017, more teens were seriously
considering suicide or hurting themselves in suicide attempts than in past decades.
To learn about suicide preventionclick here.
Teens report that they don't speak up about their mental health because they feel like adults will
just take over the conversation. Teens often won't tune into suggestions or advice because they
feel they are just being told what to do, rather than being trusted and treated as capable. And
they often don't feel their frustrations are being treated as valid — not feeling heard, seen, or
understood. Many teens report often feeling like their mental health is not taken seriously by
adults at home or at school. 
Scroll through the carousel below to read some
comments made by teenagers.
“I feel like the warning signs I gave off when I was younger, to me it felt like it
was so noticeable. I was always angry. I felt like every single day was a bad day. I
felt like nobody wanted to help me. There’s something wrong. How could you
not see it?”
- Katie, a teenager speaking about her mental health and not being seen
“Mental health is not taken seriously at all. At my school, we only have one
counselor for 8-12th grade students. That is crazy because we have 800-900
students and for all those students there is only one counselor. Schools don’t
take time to talk to students about mental health and how to take care of it.”
- unknown high school student
“I was always afraid that they[adults] were going to say it’s stupid or it’s dumb
that you feel that way, about being depressed, [like] ‘That’s not a reason to get
depressed’ and I didn’t want them to say stuff about things I felt because I
didn’t want to feel stupid.”
- 15 year old in a focus group
