- 15 year old in a focus group
“A lot of the time it feels like no one is really listening to me. It feels like they
listen to my parents, but they’re not paying attention to me … That’s why I don’t
want to help.”
- 15 year old (previously treated for mental illness)
The above quotes are just a few examples of the ongoing communication problems that teens
perceive and that inﬂuence how and if they will seek help for themselves or help for others.
Mental Illness in Early Childhood
While teens have high rates of mental health concerns, and many mental health concerns
increase in adolescence, students also face mental health challenges at an earlier age, often at
the elementary school level (e.g., McClure, 2009).
According to a study done by the Department of Psychiatry at Harvard University in 2019,
around 10% of children ages 2 to 5 showed signs of an anxiety disorder. 17.4% or 1 in 6 U.S.
children aged 2–8 years had a diagnosed mental, behavioral, or developmental disorder.
In fact, anxiety is one the most prevalent childhood mental health problems (Krain et al., 2007).
Anxiety may present in young children as fear or worry but can also make children irritable and
angry (CDC, 2022). This can create behavioral issues in school and in the classroom. Be aware,
however, that some anxious children keep their worries to themselves, and their symptoms can
be missed.
Elementary school students can be stressed about some of the same issues as middle and high
schoolers, such as struggles with academics, not having enough friends, being bullied, and
exposure to major societal issues that they are not developmentally able to understand. They
may express their stress a little differently with behaviors such as more outbursts, crying,
complaining more than usual about aches and pains, displaying surprising fearful reactions, or
excessive clinging to a parent or teacher.
…young people are faced with all kinds of challenges
on a daily basis. They may be homeless. They’re
dealing with issues of domestic violence, and
community violence. Some of them may not have
food to eat on a regular basis...they don’t leave those
issues at the door, they take those issues into the
school building and ultimately into the classroom.”
— Terri D. Wright, PhD, MPH, Founder, Center for School, Health and Education 

Strategies for Supporting Youth Mental Health
Improving Emotional Wellness at the Tier 1 Level
Knowing all the challenges to mental health and wellbeing that students experience, it is
important to have a plan in place for how to support them. Utilizing the MTSS framework and
Tier 1 support can help organize these supports.
From the ﬁrst lesson in this Tier 1 series, "Universal Supports," you know that Tier 1 is the
largest tier and the foundation for the MTSS framework. Tier 1 encompasses the entire school
community with core instruction that integrates wellness activities for all students, families,
educators, and staff to participate.
Your district may have already begun utilizing an MTSS that focuses on the academic and
behavioral needs of students. Many school districts have. Even though academic success and
student behavior are both inﬂuenced by the state of a student's mental health and wellness,
integrating mental health support continues to be a challenge for some school districts. To
prioritize and enhance student wellness, mental health practices, and interventions must be
built into the MTSS.
No matter whether your district has a current MTSS or is still in the installation process, it can
seem diffcult or overwhelming to be charged with the task of integrating mental health
practices. But it is not as hard as you think. In fact, you are already doing the work. Most
educators are already doing so many things that are considered universal (Tier 1) mental health
practices. Here is Brandi Simonsen again, discussing ways that educators may already be
implementing Tier 1 practices in the classroom.
Your district may have already begun utilizing an MTSS that focuses on the academic and
behavioral needs of students. Many school districts have. However, integrating mental health
support continues to be a challenge for some school districts, even though it is clear that
academic success and student behavior are both inﬂuenced by the state of a student's mental
health and wellness. To prioritize and enhance student wellness, mental health practices, and
interventions must be built into the MTSS.
In the following sections, we will review strategies for improving wellness, including:
Trauma-sensitive practices
Universal screening
Mental health literacy
Positive educator-student relationships

- Trauma-sensitive Practices: A trauma-sensitive school describes a school in which all students feel safe, welcomed, and
supported and where addressing trauma's impact on learning is schoolwide and at the center of
its educational mission.
“Every year, there are a few students in my 6th grade class I just can’t reach no
matter what I try...
After learning about trauma’s impact at school, their behaviors began to make
sense to me.
Now I focus on making routines predictable and try to be more conscious of the
tone of voice I use with all my students.
But I’m only one teacher in my students’ day. I know that for students to truly
feel safe, trauma sensitive approaches must be infused throughout the entire
building. How do I get this started at my school?
I can see that it will take all of us.”
- Educator, NEA.com
Trauma-Sensitive Practices
Learning about the impacts of trauma can help keep educators from misunderstanding the
reasons underlying some children’s diffculties with learning, behavior, and relationships.
Once schools understand the educational impacts of trauma, trauma sensitivity can become
a regular part of how the school is run. School becomes a safe supportive environment where
students feel connected and conﬁdent to learn and succeed. Trauma sensitivity will look
different at each school. However, a shared deﬁnition of what it means to be a trauma-
sensitive school can bring educators, parents, and policymakers together around a common
vision.
Implementing trauma-informed practices in an MTSS supports students with adverse
childhood experiences and those who are experiencing mental health issues—social,
emotional, and behavioral problems. In a tiered system, support can be implemented at all
levels.
The training,Understanding Adverse Childhood Experiences from ACE Interface, Inc. is
nationally recognized as a powerful curriculum that helps individuals understand and
recognize adverse childhood experiences.
Resources for Creating a Trauma Sensitive School
The Trauma and Learning Policy Initiative (TLPI) was created in partnership between
Massachusetts Advocates for Children and Harvard Law School with the mission to ensure that
all students, including those impacted by trauma, succeed at their highest levels in school and
in life.
Helping Traumatized Children Learn, published in 2005, is TLPI’s landmark report and
summarizes research from psychology and neurobiology that documents the impact that
trauma from exposure to violence can have on children’s learning, behavior, and relationships
in school.
Volume 2 of Helping Traumatized Children Learn: Creating and Advocating for Trauma-
Sensitive Schools (2013) offers a process for creating trauma-sensitive schools and a policy
agenda to provide the support schools need to achieve this goal. The Guide is intended to be a
living document that will grow and change as more schools become trauma sensitive and add to
their ideas.
Download both documents using the link below.
TLPI Publications - Helping Traumatized Children Learn
Helping Traumatized Children Learn volumes 1 & 2 can help any school create a
safe and secure trauma sensitive learning environment to beneﬁt all children.
Also, the National Center on Safe Supportive Learning Environments developed the Building
Trauma-Sensitive Schools Training Package to introduce all school staff to the concept of
trauma sensitivity and provide examples of trauma-sensitive practices that can be adopted in
the classroom and schoolwide. Resources include an online module, downloadable handouts,
and a facilitation guide that includes suggestions for how to conduct in-person training
sessions using the module and handouts. The National Center on Safe Supportive Learning
Environments website content was assembled under contracts from the U.S. Department of
Education, Offce of Safe and Supportive Schools to the American Institutes for Research (AIR).
Universal Screening
Another way to support wellness at the Tier 1 level of MTSS is through universal screening. Let's
review the importance of universal systematic social, emotional, and behavioral (SEB)
screening, which was discussed in detail in the previous SBHA Core MTSS Practices course,
"Screening for Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Functioning."
Promoting social and emotional development for all students in classrooms involves identifying
those students struggling with mental health challenges that impact their full access to and
participation in learning. Some of the beneﬁts of universal SEB screening include:
- Universal SEB screening is accessible to all students in the classroom.
- School-based universal SEB health screening provides important information
about the emotional and behavioral health of students.
- Universal SEB screening is the ﬁrst step in helping to identify
students in need of additional supports.
- Universal SEB screening is associated with early identiﬁcation and treatment of
mental health and behavioral concerns.
- Data from universal SEB screeners gives districts and schools the ability to monitor
school trends and develop targeted social, emotional and behavioral health
strategies speciﬁc to the needs in each individual school building.
- Universal screening is recognized as an essential component of a multi-tiered
school behavioral health framework.
SEB screening data are valid indicators of student SEB competence and risk. Having this
information helps districts pinpoint areas of need and maximize opportunities for early
intervention and prevention before poor outcomes begin to transpire. Districts can aggregate
data and make informed decisions about prioritizing, setting goals, gathering relevant
resources, and taking action.

Mental Health Literacy
Another way to support universal wellness for students is to provide mental health literacy
programming. Lack of knowledge regarding mental health and the stigma associated with
mental illness are major barriers to the promotion of mental health and early intervention.
Addressing a youth mental health crisis requires understanding what mental health is: this is
where mental health literacy can be helpful. 
Evidence-based mental health literacyis a scientiﬁcally established effective foundation for all
mental health improvements. With good mental health literacy, we are empowered and provided
with the knowledge that we need to help us build better lives, better systems of care, and a better
society (Wei & Kutcher 2018).
School-wide mental health literacy has four unique, yet integrated components:
- Understanding mental health and how to maintain good mental health
- Understanding mental disorders and their treatments
- Decreasing stigma
- Increasing health-seeking effcacy
Schoolwide programs and presentations and the regular distribution of materials to increase
mental health literacy and reduce the stigma of mental illness are Tier 1 strategies. Topics can
include many subjects, such as suicide prevention, the effects of trauma and adverse childhood
experiences (ACES), recognizing the signs of depression, anxiety, and ADHD, and improving
family relationships and self-regulation skills. Also, educators can help guide students toward
language free of mental health stigma by helping them identify and replace stigmatizing
language in the classroom.

Mental Health and High School Curriculum Guide
The Mental Health and High School Curriculum Guide is one resource that has been developed
to help enhance the mental health literacy of students and is targeted to be used in 9th and 10th
grade (ages 13 to 15 years). This is the time of the lifespan in which the diagnoses of mental
disorders begin to increase dramatically; it is thus essential that young people be able to have
the knowledge, attitudes, and competencies to help themselves and others if necessary.
Download the resource below for a curriculum guide to increasing mental health awareness.

Mental Health Literacy Website
Another resource online is mentalhealthliteracy.org. The faculties of education from St. Francis
Xavier University, Western University, and the University of British Columbia, partnered with
this project to build a comprehensive mental health literacy resource for educators. Follow the
link below to access these resources.
Mental Health Literacy
"With good mental health literacy, we learn how to take better care of
ourselves, our loved ones and our communities. We are empowered and
provided with the skills that we need to help us build better lives, better
systems of care and a better society."

Classroom WISE
Classroom WISE is a three-part training package that includes a free self-paced online course, a
comprehensive video library, and a website for K–12 educators on mental health literacy.
Developed by the Mental Health Technology Transfer Center (MHTTC) Network in partnership
with the National Center for School Mental Health, this package offers evidence-based
strategies and skills to engage and support students experiencing adversity and distress. Click
the link below to explore this resource.
Well-Being Information and Strategies for Educators Classroom WISE is a FREE
3-part training package that assists K-12 educators and school staff in
supporting the mental health of students in the classroom. Developed by the
Mental Health Technology Transfer Center (MHTTC) Network in partnership
with the National Center for School Mental Health, this package offers
evidence-based strategies and skills to engage and support students
experiencing adversity and distress.
RethinkEd
RethinkEd is a technical platform that promotes greater understanding of mental health.
Schools can partner with Rethink to help with wellness needs. See examples of the wellness
supports offered below:
Social and Emotional Skills –
Rethink Ed offers resources for students, families, staff, and educators related to behavioral
health.
There are resources for educators to help students develop important skills like stress
management, resilience, and empathy while learning to build a safe and affrming culture within
the school community.
Supports Mental Wellness –
By providing supports for the mental wellness of students, families, staff, and educators,
Rethinks Mental Wellness Solution promotes a greater understanding of mental health and
wellbeing while supplying strategies that support the success of the entire school community.
Promotes Educator & Staff Resilience, Wellbeing, & Performance –
Resources to help educators and staff put their well-being ﬁrst so that they can focus better, feel
less stress, and create happy learning environments for the students.
Rethink Ed can also support schools with the process of
MTSS implementation. It also provides support and
other resources for special education and professional
development. For more information, follow the link
below
RETHINKED
Innovative Solutions for Healthier Schools | RethinkEd
Combining technology and research to deliver industry leading solutions in SEL,
mental health, professional development, and special education.


National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI)
The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) has created Ending the Silence, a free,
evidence-based, 50-minute session designed for middle and high school students. This
engaging presentation helps students learn about the warning signs of mental health
conditions, facts and statistics about mental illness, and the steps to take if they or a loved one
are showing symptoms of a mental health condition.
This program is offered at no cost to schools and communities and is presented in person, but it
is also now available online when an in-person presentation is not available.
NAMI Ending the Silence presentations include two leaders: one who shares an informative
presentation and a young adult with a mental health condition who shares their journey of
recovery. Audience members can ask questions and gain understanding of an often-
misunderstood topic. Through dialogue, we can help grow the movement to end stigma.
NAMI also offers programming for staff and families:
NAMI Ending the Silence for School Staff (in person only): 1-hour presentation for school staff
members that includes information about warning signs, facts, statistics, how to approach
students, and how to work with families.
NAMI Ending the Silence for Families(in-person only): 1-hour presentation for adults with
middle- or high-school-aged youth that includes warning signs, facts, statistics, how to talk
with your child, and how to work with school staff.
Schedule an Ending the Silence Presentation
If you would like to host an in person or virtual NAMI Ending the Silence presentation at your school or
youth group, click the button for more information.

Building Positive Educator-Student Relationships
One more way to promote universal wellness for students is to promote positive relationships.
Educators strive to engage students, promote the highest standards of academics, attend to the
needs of each learner, support each and every success, and genuinely care about the wellbeing
of each student.
Whether you are new to the school district or have been around for 20+ years, you know that
positive student-adult interactions encourage students' motivation and engagement in
learning. Watch this video from Edutopia giving a quick overview of the "power of relationships
in schools" and why this is one of the most important aspects of teaching.
The Power of Relationships in Schools
The Power of Relationships in Schools
Intentionally building positive student-educator relationships promotes trust and respect,
reduces stress, and serves as one of the most important overall drivers of student, educator, and
whole-school wellness. Scroll through the carousel to gain information about practices that can
be used to develop relationships and build positive school and classroom community.
Effective Relationship-Building Practices
Relationship-building practices are proven to be effective in supporting student
well-being in schools and classrooms. Here we highlight four examples:community
circles, relationship mapping, audit & reﬂect, and engagement & connectedness.
Example 1
Community Circles
A classroom practice that emphasizes predictable, structured open dialogues between
students and adults.
Community Circles allow educators to see each student as an individual. Each student
brings a unique story and perspective each day, enriching and enlivening the class
with their viewpoints.
One easy way to enhance the relationship between students and adults is to let them
know when you don’t see them there. For example, one high school English teacher
shared that she records a quick message with her students at the beginning of class
and sends it to those who are absent to let them know they were missed. 
Community Circles can be used with all grade levels.
Example 2
Trust and Safety through Relationship Mapping
When a student is more familiar with you, they feel comfortable and safe.
The relationship and trust that is built provides an opportunity to learn about the
student and techniques that may work best to help them.
Build relationships intentionally.
Relationship Mappingis an activity that connects one adult to every student in
school. Having a trusting and deep connection with students increases a sense of
belonging in the school community, reduces bullying, lowers drop-out rates, and
improves social and emotional capacities. This tool allows staff to inventory their
relationships and create an action plan to ensure all students feel a sense of
belonging.
Example 3
Audit & Reffect
You read all about school and classroom expectations in the previous lesson, but did
you include setting and meeting expectations for yourself? Take a moment to notice
the way that you interact with your students. If possible, watch a video of your own
teaching. 
Equity Audit and Reﬂection is a list of questions that allow teachers to reﬂect on
whether they use culturally responsive teaching in their classroom to ensure equity.
Some example questions include:
Are you giving students meaningful feedback that says you care about them and
their learning or are you constantly telling your students to hurry?
In your conversations, are you focusing on what your students have accomplished
or are you concentrating your comments on what they have not yet mastered?
Does your body language, facial expression, and tone of voice show your students
that you are interested in them as people too?
Are you telling them to do one thing, yet you model quite different behavior? For
example, are you telling your students to listen to each other, but then look bored
when one of them talks to the class?
Are you paying more attention to some students than to others?
Example 4
Engagement & Connectedness
How do educators create opportunities for full engagement for students in safe
learning environments? By ﬁnding ways to connect content and curriculum to the
everyday lives of students.
Promoting connectedness among all school community members is key to fostering
an open and positive dialogue and participation in various well-being activities:
celebrate resilience and acknowledge that fear and worry are normal human
reactions and each individual student, teacher or parent experiences them to
different degrees. 
set up networks where students and adults positively interact.
support members of the school community to express their feelings and
concerns;
dedicate time and space for this in your daily routine
Check out this resource for more info on school connectedness:
Summary
Improving students' relationships with teachers has important, positive and long-
lasting implications for both students' academic and social development.
Positive teacher-student relationships—evidenced by teachers' reports of low
conﬂict, a high degree of closeness and support, and little dependency—have been
shown to support students' adjustment to school, contribute to their social skills,
promote academic performance and foster students' resiliency in academic
performance (e.g., Battistich, Schaps, & Wilson, 2004). 
Additional Resources

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- A universal approach to wellness in schools means that everyone will have access to
positive health and wellbeing supports. These supports are appropriate for each
grade level and should be rigorously implemented to build and strengthen skills
that are part of the foundation for good mental health and resilience.
- All parts of the school, from the front door to the playground, offer opportunities to
practice and reinforce wellness. Wellness does not spontaneously grow in the
sidewalk cracks of time between class assignments and faculty meetings.
- Simply put, those who feel better can learn better.
Before you go!




#####
Tier 2
*****
Welcome to the comprehensive course on implementing Tier 2 school mental and behavioral health
interventions. In the following lessons, we will equip you with the knowledge and strategies needed to plan and
implement supportive and e ective Tier 2 practices within your school community. As you know, the primary
goal of Tier 2 interventions is to provide targeted support to students who are at risk of experiencing mental
and behavioral health challenges. By implementing Tier 2, educators identify and assist students who may be
struggling before these issues escalate into more severe problems. It is the bridge between those students who
may not be as responsive to Tier 1 interventions, but do not require the intensive services typically associated
with Tier 3 supports. Each lesson will guide you through essential concepts and practical steps to enhance the
well-being of your students and create a positive learning environment. Let's begin!
Installing and Launching Tier 2
MTSS Teams Making Data-informed Decisions
Mentoring-Based Programs
Self-Care and Coping for Educators
Classroom Programs for Mental Health and Emotional Literacy
@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 5
Installing and Launching Tier 2


Outcomes:
1. Evaluate the role of Tier 2 in the Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS)
2. Recognize the pre-installation steps needed before Tier 2 is launched
3. Conceptualize a plan for installing Tier 2 in your schools
4. Communicate steps necessary to launch Tier 2
5. Review progress monitoring and evaluation tools speciﬁc to Tier 2


The Middle Ground


Bridging Supports Between Tier 1 and Tier 3
Think about your students for a moment. 
Happy students
You can remember a student that you knew was thriving—the one with steady and healthy friendships, who was growing towards
their learning goals and stepping closer towards fulﬁlling the proﬁle of a South Carolina graduate.
For students who are thriving, Tier 1 supports are likely su cient for their growth. With a strong Tier 1 foundation, many of your
students (~80%) will be ﬂourishing academically, behaviorally, and socially.
Reﬂect on your educational experience again. You can most likely remember a student who was struggling intensely—the one who
either never spoke up or was always disrupting his or her environment, who was close to dropping out, and was mentally
elsewhere while at school.
Three students bullying another one 
For the up to 20% of students who are acutely struggling, Tier 3 provides the intense, individualized care they need to gain positive
student outcomes. 


Students in the Middle 
A student with head on desk
What about students with struggles not quite as apparent as students with Tier 3 supports? 
These are students who aren't exhibiting extreme internalizing or externalizing behaviors, and are not on the brink of dropping
out, but show warning signs that Tier 1 support isn't meeting their needs.
That's where Tier 2 comes in, and it is the focus of our lesson!
MTSS pyramid
As you think of the Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS), what lies in the middle of the MTSS triangle may feel like it's the
hardest to deﬁne. This is supported by MTSS consultants who ﬁnd that schools understand and implement Tier 1 and Tier 3 but
struggle to distinguish and bolster their Tier 2 supports (Shurley, 2022). 
If this sounds familiar to you or is something you’re worried about, you don’t need to panic! Throughout this course, you’ll learn
the role of Tier 2 in MTSS, analyze the key elements of Tier 2, and evaluate the practical steps involved in Tier 2 implementation.
Let’s start by exploring Tier 2’s role and function within MTSS. While Tier 2 may seem like a bridge covering an overwhelming
distance, we, the SBHA, are here to guide you along the journey! 
If you recognize this situation or have concerns about it, there's no need to worry! This lesson will help you understand the role of
Tier 2 in MTSS, analyze key components, and assess the steps for implementation.  While Tier 2 may seem like a bridge covering an
overwhelming distance, we, the SBHA team, are here to guide you! Let's begin by exploring the function of Tier 2 supports within
an MTSS framework. 


What is Tier 2?  
Tier 2 is based on group problem-solving around common areas of need within the school (IEP Technical Center, 2023). The key
words for Tier 2 are instruction and intervention. 

Instruction
Tier 2 is an extension of Tier 1’s instruction for academics, behavior, and positive health and wellbeing. Students receiving Tier 2
supports are given more instruction and time to learn and practice the skills that they are struggling with. In many ways, you are
sca olding your work with Tier 1 with what you're already doing in the classroom. Dr. Lucille Eber, an experienced MTSS and PBIS
practitioner, sums up this aspect of Tier 2 supports beautifully with reading as an example: 
Positive health and wellbeing refers to a person’s physical, emotional, mental, and social wellbeing. You may be familiar
with the term “social-emotional learning”, and may even see materials in this course that reference SEL. Don’t worry—the
material still applies even with the different terms! 
“A Tier 2 support should merely be seen as an extension of what’s done every day in the
classroom, just like reading. You teach everybody reading, and some kids get more practice—
they don’t get something completely di erent. They get a little bit more, and a little bit more
individualized and more practice at it.”
- Dr. Lucille Eber, MTSS and PBIS Practitioner
As Dr. Eber said, Tier 2 is an extension of what you're already doing. It is not separate from Tier 1 activities or the relationships
you've already built with your students. It's simply more. While this is hard to capture in words, the rest of this lesson will clarify
how Tier 2 is an extension of what you're already doing. 

Intervention
One of the ways Tier 2 supports accomplish additional instruction is through targeted interventions, programs, and groups.
Targeted interventions with students receiving Tier 2 support typically occur in a small group format but may be done in a
classroom or in a one-on-one setting. Tier 2 interventions cover topics such as social skills, self-management, academic support,
and behavioral groups (Taveena, 2021). These are run by school faculty and sta  members who have been trained in the
appropriate intervention! You'll learn more about speciﬁc Tier 2 interventions later on in upcoming lessons! 








Tier 2 is not isolated from schoolwide systems, including the other MTSS tiers. Tier 2 is an extension of Tier 1 supports at a more intense,
targeted level.

Ideally, a student identified as needing Tier 2 supports is in an intervention within 72 hours. Realistically, students are placed in interventions
that are always running instead of "once a year" or semi-annually.

There is a “menu” of Tier 2 interventions that are easy to identify  implement and are known by all educators and staff.  

Let's be clear—Tier 2 is not reinventing the wheel or creating an individualized plan for each student. You take pre-established interventions
that are readily accessible and continuously available and implement them quickly and efficiently.

Tier 2 interventions are evidence-based with proven effectiveness and relevance to your students’ needs. Interventions are not randomly
created or haphazardly assigned to students.  

Students who need Tier 2 services are identified through multiple streams of data, such as teacher, parent, or self-nominations, universal
screeners, assessments, office discipline referrals, and more.

Using multiple streams of data and assessments, the intervention is assessed for its effectiveness and its implementation.
Tier 2 MTSS interventions are like constructing bridges in education. Like bridges connect distinct areas, Tier 2 bridges the space
between universal strategies (Tier 1) and intensive interventions (Tier 3). Imagine diverse student terrain; Tier 1 is the foundation.
However, some students may require additional support to cross over challenges that lie ahead. This is where Tier 2 interventions
step in as the bridge over obstacles that may be impeding their progress. Interventions are tailored to the speciﬁc needs of each
student. Just like bridges adapt to landscapes, interventions vary—small groups, personalized plans. Tier 2 o ers stability, aiding
students in navigating challenges. Supports at this tier are intended to be temporary, fostering growth, and guiding students
toward Tier 1 success with newfound skills.


The Process of Tier 2 Supports
Tier 2 is for students who are not thriving with Tier 1 supports but are also not exhibiting behavior or outcomes more appropriate
for Tier 3’s intensive, individualized care. Students receiving Tier 2 supports are in the in-between: they are at risk of presenting
more severe externalizing or internalizing behaviors, indicators of poor health and wellbeing, or academic struggles. 
A typical school base rate for Tier 2 is 10-15% of your students. Just because certain students need more support than Tier 1 o ers
does not mean that these students lose access to Tier 1 supports while they receive Tier 2 services. That is, students will always
need and have access to the support o ered by Tier 1!  
Students don’t have to move through the tiers sequentially. If a student comes in immediately needing Tier 2 support, you don’t
wait for them to adjust to Tier 1 ﬁrst. Within MTSS, students will move throughout the tiers ﬂuidly as needed. This means students
will move in and out of Tier 2 supports as their needs change! You can always walk forward, backwards, or pause on a bridge. It’s
the same with Tier 2!
Let's have a quick look at the overarching Tier 2 process! Don’t worry, the rest of this lesson will go into more detail. 


Introduction
Tier 2 Overview

Identi cation
Component 1
Students' need for Tier 2 supports are identiﬁed through data-based assessments, screeners, and nominations. 

Timeline
Component 2
Ideally, once a student is identiﬁed, they are in an intervention within 72-hours. However, this is not always possible.
When that timeframe is not realistic, the focus is on accommodating the student’s needs and school resources while
aiming for that 72-hour goal. 

Intervention
Component 3
Interventions are evidence and research-based, applied by a trained instructor and educator to small groups,
individual students in mentoring programs, or in the classroom structure. 

Fading Out
Component 4
Tier 2 is not a destination. Progress data and implementation is monitored to decide if the intervention should be
maintained, changed, or ceased as the student moves back to solely Tier 1 supports or up to Tier 3 treatment.
As we all know, most of life does not move linearly. This overview of the Tier 2 process is just that—a 3,000-foot
view above look at Tier 2. The actual "nitty gritty" of Tier 2 can be much more ﬂuid and changing.

Summary
Now that you have a base deﬁnition of Tier 2, let’s compare it to Tier 1 and Tier 3 to get a better picture of Tier 2’s unique function! 


The Di erence Between Tiers
As you compare the tiers to examine their di erences, you may remember the term layering, if you have taken our Core MTSS
course. Layering is applying several interventions at the same time. That is Tier 2 and Tier 3 occur along with the tiers that come
before them. That means that Tier 2 interventions are occurring with Tier 1, and Tier 3 interventions occur with Tier 1 and Tier 2
supports. These tiers operate as a team, not as separate targets!
Chart comparing the di erent tiers
One of the more evident di erences between the tiers is the number of students supported by each tier. Tier 1 is for all students;
Tier 2 is for groups of students; Tier 3 is for individual students. Tier 2 is the in-between of “all students at all times” and “one
student at unique times.” 
A spectrum of tiers
By "groups of students," we don’t mean that every Tier 2 program or intervention takes place in a small group. We mean that Tier 2
programs or interventions are for a group of students that may be in small group intervention (e.g., group grief counseling), a one-
on-one intervention (e.g., Check In, Check Out [CICO]), or even classroom wide. Therefore, the “group” could be the small group,
or the overall group of each student in CICO, for example.   
With this understanding of Tier 2’s distinction from the other tiers and its function, let’s look practically at how we install and
launch Tier 2 within our schools. You are going to review the following steps:  
Pre-Installation Steps
Installation Steps
Launching Tier 2
Monitoring and Evaluating Tier 2
Tier 1
For all students at all times
Schoolwide expectations are
established
Tier 2
For students at risk of
escalating
Interventions/instruction
may occur in a group, class
wide, or mentoring format
Tier 3
Wraparound services
Individualized treatment for a
student
	


Pre-Installation Steps


Before You Cross the Bridge: Preparing for Installation and Student Identiﬁcation
Planning and preparation are the keystones of success. As you delve into the realm of Tier 2 pre-installation, you may ﬁnd yourself
at a critical juncture where the foundation for a sturdy and reliable bridge is laid. Much like architects and engineers who map out
every detail before construction begins, understanding and mastering Tier 2 pre-installation is a vital step towards ensuring the
structural integrity and longevity of the bridge projects. You will now explore the essential concepts and techniques that underpin
the art of pre-installing Tier 2.  


Finding Essential Bridge Construction Tools: Finding the Right Equipment 
Planning for Tier 2 installation can feel overwhelming. It may be hard to know where to begin, especially since it’s building on Tier
1 foundations. Asking these questions from the Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS)'s Tier 2 Readiness Guide
(n.d.)  may be helpful:  
7 questions to ask about Tier 2 installation
When answering these questions, know that answering them “no,” isn’t a dead end! That is your
starting place! 
When answering the questions, write down the actions needed, identify who has the capacity to take that on and when, and list the
resources you have available to help! Creating a schedule can help ensure that planned actions are being followed through on. As
you can tell from the ﬁrst question, Tier 1 has a pivotal role to play in successfully implementing Tier 2.  You are going to review
that in more detail now! 
When answering the questions, write down the actions needed, identify who has the capacity to take that on and when, and list the
resources you have available to help! Creating a schedule can help ensure that planned actions are being followed through  in a
broad ligh. As you can tell from the ﬁrst question, Tier 1 has a pivotal role to play in successfully implementing Tier 2.  You are
going to review that in more detail now! 


Strengthening Your Tier 1 Supports, One Bridge at a Time
A bridge over a body of water

Tier 2 needs Tier 1. After all, Tier 1 is the literal foundation of the MTSS triangle. 
In a study of 776 schools in 244 school districts across 27 states, Kittleman et al. (2022) found that having a strong Tier 1
foundation implemented with ﬁdelity was the most substantial help in installing Tier 2 with success. Further, installing the
tiers over time, instead of all at once, positively impacted Tier 2 success. 
Other key pieces were: 
-Dedicated resources (e.g., time, materials, money) to Tier 2  
-Trained and coached school faculty and sta  
-Parents and caregivers’ engagement in Tier 2
Alongside Kittleman et al.’s (2022) ﬁndings, other researchers recommended having the following Tier 1 pieces solidiﬁed:  
-Expectations and rules established and contextualized across school settings
-Students actively supervised and given opportunities for responses that demonstrate their academic, behavioral,
and positive health and wellbeing
-Sata  and faculty o er pre-corrections and acknowledge students when they meet goals
-Deﬁned, well-known strategies available to correct errors
These recommendations represent ideals, and while we acknowledge that our schools may not always reach these lofty standards,
we all are committed to continuous improvement. You know that there will be students needing access to Tier 2 and Tier 3 supports
before either of those tiers is ready to launch. You know that if you wait for Tier 1 to be “perfect” before launching Tier 2, you will
most likely never get there. We cannot put o  supporting students in need because we think we still need to reach some vague,
undeﬁned level of “readiness.” 

Research recommends a strong Tier 1 foundation before Tier 2, and the need
for Tier 2 pressing. How can this challenge be addressed? 
While there are no straightforward answers to this question, here are some recommendations.
F I N D  Y O UR   C A PA C I T Y
T I E R   1   DATA
T I E R E D  F I DE L I T Y   I N V E N T O R Y
Start with simply ﬁnding out what you can do. Finding your capacity for implementation will help set your and your school’s
expectations (Hatton et al., 2020). We know that having 10–15% of students receiving Tier 2 support is a desired base rate, but that
might not reﬂect what your school actually needs. Find your base rate using data-based decision rules, which you’ll learn more about
later, from your data streams (e.g., attendance, achievement of academic goals, o ce discipline referrals, etc.). 
Ask yourself: How many students need Tier 2 support? And how many can we serve based on our interventions, resources, and sta ?
You may have an actual base rate of 7% instead of 10–15%, but only have the capacity to serve 4–5% of that 7%. That is where you
start! As Tier 2 implementation becomes more stable, you scale up to serve all students in need of Tier 2 support with your resources
and interventions.   
F I N D  Y O UR   C A PA C I T Y
T I E R   1   DATA
T I E R E D  F I DE L I T Y   I N V E N T O R Y
Focus on ensuring that your Tier 1 data systems are solidiﬁed before installing Tier 1. This is your universal screening data, school
records, o ce discipline referrals, teacher observations, and more. Focusing on your Tier 1 data collection and management is
helpful for Tier 2’s installation because Tier 2 requires your Tier 1 data, as well as other data routines which you’ll learn more about
later!  
F I N D  Y O UR   C A PA C I T Y
T I E R   1   DATA
T I E R E D  F I DE L I T Y   I N V E N T O R Y
Know where your Tier 1 supports are before installing Tier 2. To do this, you can use the Tiered Fidelity Inventory (TFI). It has three
surveys, one for each tier, and they can be used together or separately (PBIS, n.d.). While it’s been recommended to have 70–80% of
TFI items in place before Tier 2 implementation, we know that this isn’t always feasible. Like we said earlier, you can focus on
ensuring your Tier 1 data systems are ready and use the TFI to review that piece in particular! 
 
Download the TFI which offers information for developing an action plan
that guides implementation.   
Tiered Fidelity Inventory.pdf
3.9 MB
Implementing Tier 2 after Tier 1 can be challenging. The tiers overlap with one another while remaining distinct; they build on top
of each other while contributing something unique. It can be di cult to know when your school is ready. We hear you and
understand! 
As you prepare to install Tier 2, think through ways to avoid the common pitfalls school face when preparing and installing Tier 2,
shown in the slides below (Kirk, 2022; Kittleman et al., 2022):   


Pitfalls to Avoid

Pitfall 1
You need to know the student so you understand why the evidence-based interventions might work for that student.   

Pitfall 2

Assuming You Do Not Have Enough Time to Implement These Interventions
Tier 2 interventions are built on Tier 1 supports and integrated into your schoolwide system. Because you’re not
reinventing the wheel, implementing Tier 2 may not be as heavy a lift as you are thinking, especially when done in
teams.   

Believing That One Intervention Will Solve All Problems

Pitfall 3
Interventions are not “one-size-ﬁts-all." There are di erent interventions for di erent challenges, and you may
need to try multiple interventions before a need is met.

Being Scared of Data

Pitfall 4
Collect data and use it for your empowerment! If the data shows an intervention isn’t working, don’t take it
personally. Instead, use the data to adapt, change, or maintain an intervention as needed.
Well Done!
You've reviewed common pitfalls to avoid when preparing your Tier 2 journey. Again, the ultimate focus is
supporting students in the best way possible, and that goal is our guiding principle as we wrestle with the challenge
of Tier 2 implementation.


Who is Helping You to Build the Bridge: Finding Your Team
Know that installing and implementing Tier 2 is not a one-person job! The responsibility
does not rest on your shoulders alone. Installing and launching Tier 2 takes a group of
people. Whether your school has an abundance of teams or a few scattered
groupings, know that you’re not in this alone.
As we refer to “you” throughout the rest of this lesson, we’re referring to the collective group of people installing and
implementing Tier 2! Further, when we say, “MTSS teams,” we are referring to whoever has a role in installing and launching Tier
2. That may be a formally named team or a group of individuals. You'll be learning about MTSS teaming in the very next lesson, so
we will be brief here! The MTSS team is responsible for:   
-allocating the school’s resources to Tier 2 
-creating the schedules for Tier 2 interventions and training 
-collecting and monitoring data and implementation ﬁdelity 
-connecting students to resources 
-meeting regularly  
-staying up to date on Tier 2 training and professional development 
-contacting stakeholders (e.g., families, community partners, district educators, students) and sharing their Tier 2 plans
While there is no “one size ﬁts all” for what a team should look like, it can be extremely helpful to include school administration,
classroom educators, behavior specialists, and school counselors (Hatton et al., 2020; PBIS, n.d., Shurley, 2022). Like we said
earlier, you’ll be covering teams in more detail in the very next lesson! For now, let’s move forward to determining the Tier 2
resources you already have in place at your schools! 
Be mindful that teams may be formed with a context focus. For example, instead of having an integrated teaming approach
(e.g., a Tier 2 team addressing both the behavioral and academic needs of students), some schools may prefer to have
separate teams for behavior and academic support. However, we recommend prioritizing a single MTSS team where all
team members are based in one school MTSS team. This uni ed team provides consistency, coordination, ef ciency, and
collaboration in the implementation of interventions and support across all tiers. 


Assembling the Tool Box: Knowing What You Have and What You Need
A man looking at map in front of a bridge
Before installing Tier 2, you need to know what you already have in place (Hatton et al., 2020; Shurley, 2022).
To start, you can resource map!
Lay out each intervention your school already has in a spreadsheet; include the name of the intervention, what area or need it
targets, the grade level it is appropriate for, when it was acquired and ﬁrst used, and the date of most recent training. If you want a
refresher or are interested in learning more, there is a more detailed lesson on resource mapping in our Core MTSS course!  
Having an intervention inventory that outlines the exact limitation the intervention responds to is key for e ciency. This way,
when a student is identiﬁed as needing Tier 2 support, you can quickly examine the interventions available for that student’s need
(Powers et al., 2020). 
We’ve attached a template adapted from the Intervention Central templates (2018) that you can use to create your resource map.
You can see at the screenshot below (click to enlarge) where we've included Check In, Check Out (CICO) as an example; you'll learn
more about CICO in upcoming lessons!
Intervention Inventory Template.xlsx
9.4 KB
Intervention inventory template
After you lay out the interventions you already have, think through what you need. Do you need a better intervention for teaching
social skills? Would it be helpful to have interventions more targeted to math?
As you think through what needs the school has, consider the demographics, population, and geographic location of your school.
Think through your student body’s needs as well. 
After you’ve outlined what you need, assign a schedule within your MTSS team to ﬁnd options and report back on them! If, on the
other hand, you have too many interventions and you realize some haven’t been used for quite some time, streamline! Narrow your
interventions down to the most e ective and appropriate for your student body.  
If you’re starting from scratch or need help identifying what resources you want, plan for 3-4 interventions each for
academics, behavior, and positive health and wellbeing. When brainstorming new interventions to adopt or reviewing your
existing interventions, remember that they need to be readily accessible, effective, evidence-based, and low effort to
implement. 
Do you need some inspiration ﬁnding interventions? Here are three fantastic resources to use! 
Best Evidence Encyclopedia o ers reports on interventions for reading, mathematics, writing, science, and more! It is linked
below.

Home
This website aims to empower educators with evidence on proven programs. Blog archive from the
late Robert Slavin, who served as the Director of the Center for Research and Reform in Education at
Johns Hopkins University See Robert Slavin's blog archive about educational policy, research, and
innovation. Program Reviews
READ MORE BEST EVIDENCE ENCYCLOPEDIA 
What Works Clearinghouse hosts practice guides, intervention reports, reviews of individual research studies, and data from
reviews. Its intervention reports can be broken down by intervention, strength of research, tier level, subject, and more! This is a
great resource if you are looking for inspiration. 

WWC | Find What Works!
As an initiative of the U.S. Department of Education's Institute of Education Sciences (IES), the What
Works Clearinghouse (WWC) was created in 2002 to be a central and trusted source of scientiﬁc
evidence for what works in education.
READ MORE ED 
The National Center on Intensive Interventions' Tool Charts are detailed instruments to review your academic and behavioral
interventions and progress monitoring resources. It breaks interventions down by strength of evidence, grade level, information,
the behaviors or academic limitations that are targeted, and the type of review that was conducted. It even allows you to compare
tools!

Tools Chart Overview
Tools charts display expert ratings on the technical rigor of assessments and interventions. Products
are reviewed by an external Technical Review Committee of experts. Products are rated against
established criteria and not compared to each other or ranked. Charts are updated during a call for
submissions.
READ MORE INTENSIVEINTERVENTION 
Once you know what you have and what you need, you can begin your review of the student identiﬁcation process!


Where Are You Building a Bridge? Identifying Students
The students you’re identifying for Tier 2 supports occupy an “in-between” space. They are not currently exhibiting extreme
challenges, as noted by Powers et al. (2020), but they are at risk of escalating and are not being supported by Tier 1 su ciently.
What does your screening process look like now? It may occur at speciﬁc times throughout the academic year, such as term starts
and endings, or your screeners may exist just for academics. We want a clearly deﬁned identiﬁcation plan for all students, and in
this section, you are going to learn more about identifying these students in the middle.  
Before we go into formal methods of identifying students for Tier 2 supports, we want to acknowledge what you are already doing.

Informal Methods
Educators know when a student is struggling. We acknowledged this at the very beginning—educators can tell when a student is
thriving or falling behind. Educators are developing, maintaining, and even restoring relationships with their students every day.
That relationship is, in and of itself, a primary way you're already identifying when students need Tier 2 supports. Dr. Lucille Eber,
the experienced PBIS and MTSS practitioner we met earlier, sums it up well:  
“
"Most teachers don’t go, ‘Oh, I’m going into a Tier 2 mode with this kid for reading!’...They feel comfortable just
naturally ramping it up. That’s what we want to get to with multi-tiered systems."”
Dr. Lucille Eber
Like Dr. Eber said, you’re most likely not thinking, “Oh, let me move Janice up to Tier 2 supports now!” Instead, it’s much more
natural. You are “informally” understanding when students are having emotional, academic, and behavioral problems and you take
steps towards enhancing the relationship with the child to support them. 
You notice when Matthew has been silent and withdrawn for a couple of weeks, and you decide to check in with him before he
leaves at the end of each day. 
You picked up on Fernando’s embarrassment and shyness about reading in front of class, so you decided to move him into a
reading group with other students who needed additional support. 
This is identifying students! You notice something is o  so you allocate more e ort in your relationship with that student. 
We don’t want this process to stop; instead, we simply want to name it and merge it with data-based assessments as well! 
The informal process is often the starting place of Tier 2 identiﬁcation. Once you notice this shift, you continue emphasizing your
relationship with the student while recommending them for a more formal assessment. 

Formal Identi cation
When identifying students for Tier 2 supports, you want the data you collect to be accurate for each part of a student’s being:
academics, behavior, and emotional wellbeing (Intervention Central, 2018). Key formal streams of data you can use to identify
students who are at risk are listed below (PBIS, n.d.). 
-Screening scores
-Teacher nomination*
-Parent nomination*
-Self-nomination*
-Support service recommendations
-Assessments (e.g., SAEBRs)
-Universal screenings
-office discipline referrals (ODRs)

*Here is a Google form below that you can use or adapt for an easy, accessible
student referral nomination from teachers, parents or caregivers, or the
student themselves!
GOOGLE DOCS
Student for Tier 2 Supports Referral 
Sign in to Google to save your progress. Learn more
* Indicates required question
Your Name:  *
Your answer
St udent  Name:  *
Student for Tier 2 Supports Referral
VIEW ON GOOGLE DOCS 
Ideally, a designated team is responsible for reviewing the data and making decisions based on it. If this is not something your
school currently has in place, make a note to bring it up at the next appropriate time, such as during a school administration
meeting or when you see your MTSS coordinator down the hall. 
It can be helpful to have software that collects and analyzes data. This can be done manually, using an Excel spreadsheet, or
through a fee-based software, such as SWIS or eDoctrina. SWIS, an app from PBIS, is a tool that has been used  in Tier 2 Data
collection (Hatton et al., 2020). eDoctrina is another popular tool that your district or school may have! If you want to learn more
about SWIS or eDoctrina, visit the links below.  

PBISApps | SWIS
Collect o ce discipline referral data and make active, data-driven decisions to create the kind of
school where every student is successful.
READ MORE PBISAPPS 

Data Tools to Implement MTSS and RTI with Fidelity | eDoctrina
The Daunting Task for Administrators One of your most essential, yet complicated, responsibilities
are supporting the wide variety of learning needs of all students. Data-driven education practices
continue to revolutionize the way we approach learning. Reams of data are only helpful if you can
quickly see patterns.
READ MORE EDOCTRINA 
If your school decides to use a data aggregating system, ensure that you account for the entire student. By that, we mean thinking
through the “why” behind the data. This is especially true for students who experience a sudden shift in behavior or attitude that
impacts their likelihood of being reviewed for Tier 2 services.  
The data collected for student identiﬁcation should answer the following questions from Resa (n.d.):
The four questions data should answer
Once you’ve collected your data, you need to know what to do with it. When you have multiple streams of data coming in at once,
putting the pieces together can be overwhelming. That’s where data decision rules come in. 

Data Decision Rules
You’ll learn more about data-informed decision-making in Lesson 2; for now, let’s have a brief overview! 
Data decision rules help you know when to consider students for Tier 2 services (Powers et al., 2020). These are rules that outline
which streams of data will be monitored and which decision is required based on the data. It is highly recommended to create an
identiﬁcation plan. Your identiﬁcation plan is a tangible, formal resource with your school that prevents confusion and aids
expediency when examining a student for Tier 2 services. It does this by outlining the:
An opened toolbox
-method of data identiﬁcation
-purpose and process of the identiﬁcation
-who is responsible for checking that source of data
-how the data is used to make decisions
Here is a template adapted from Hatton et al. (2020) for you to use, as well as a screenshot of what it looks like! Click to enlarge the
screenshot.
Data Identi cation Plan.xlsx
9.3 KB
Data identiﬁcation plan
When using your data, it's important to triangulate it. Data triangulation is when you use multiple, usually 3+, streams of data
before making a decision about a speciﬁc phenomenon. Data triangulation in assessing whether students are eligible for Tier 2
supports is not black and white. Here are some examples. Click to enlarge.
Three examples of students with potential Tier 2 eligibility based on data
We can't answer those questions for your school because data decision rules created for you will be unique from the data decision
rules of another school within your district—that’s okay! 

Data decision rules are meant to be formatted to the needs, baseline, and culture of your
school, which means that they will change as your school does! 
As you formalize your data decision rules, you might realize your school relies too heavily on ODRs and doesn't catch students with
internalizing concerns, or that your school relies solely on teacher nomination, and misses students otherwise identiﬁed by
screeners.
When you adapt your data decision rules, you are simply shifting your position further
across the bridge, not stepping away entirely.
Within data decision rules, certain pieces of data can be given more weight than others. For example, a self-nomination with only 1
ODR can prompt assessing a student for Tier 2 services, or a self-nomination with a teacher nomination might prompt an
assessment. Ideally, all data streams should be utilized together. However, if your data decision rules for Tier 2 are in their
beginnings, you want to consider at least two di erent data sources at a minimum (a.k.a., triangulating your data!).
Now that you’ve reviewed and updated your student identiﬁcation plan, you need to know what interventions are appropriate and
available!  


Picking the Right River: Picking the Intervention Based on Student Need
You’ve got your inventory of interventions. 
You’ve collected the data and analyzed it. 
Out of all of the interventions available, how do you know which one is best? You can use the “Problem Solving Cycle” from
Pechacheck & Ehlers (2019) to ﬁgure that out!
The problem solving cycle
When picking an intervention for your students, know that there is no magical “ﬁx-all.” Each intervention has its strengths and
limitations, and each intervention may not work for every student. Adapting or changing an intervention for a student isn’t a
failure; it’s progress! 
While we will brie y introduce Tier 2 interventions later on in this lesson, you’ll receive a deeper dive on them in this
course. The resources we linked above from Best Evidence Encyclopedia, What Works Clearinghouse, and the toolkits from
the National Center on Intensive Interventions are great places to look if you're curious!
As you’re looking at new interventions or reviewing the ones you have, look for interventions that increase(PBIS, n.d.):
-Instruction and practice with students' social skills, behavior, and academics
- adult interaction
-Opportunities for positive reinforcement
-Opportunities for pre-correction
-Focus on the function of the student's actions or inactions


Final Thoughts on Pre-Installation Steps
As you reﬂect on your pre-installation steps for Tier 2, we want to point you back to the questions from the Tier 2 Systems
Readiness Guide (PBIS, n.d.): 
 7 questions to ask about Tier 2 installation
As we’ve said before, answering any of those questions with a “no” or “not yet” isn’t a sign to stop Tier 2 altogether. It is simply
a guide to areas of your Tier 2 preparation that might need more work! Don’t let that scare you. After these pre-installation steps
are completed, you can move forward into installing Tier 2!


Installation Steps


Putting One Foot In Front of the Other


Planning Out Your Day: Setting Up a Schedule for Delivering Tier 2 Interventions
If possible, it is helpful to avoid starting new interventions in the middle of the school year unless there is a clear, data-informed
need (Shurley, 2022). Instead, work with your administration to allocate resources and sta  to intervention implementation at the
beginning of the year. Since sta  and faculty need to be trained in delivering these interventions, o ering professional
development courses early in the school year will prepare sta  when interventions are needed later!  
Ideally, you’d be planning during the summer or even the school year ahead to create your Tier 2 intervention schedule. However,
we know that life often doesn’t work in ideals. As we make the suggestions for scheduling, know that they’re just suggestions.
What matters is getting support to our students! 
Because each school is unique, we cannot o er a schedule template of: “Monday, at 11:40 AM, conduct ______ intervention; at
2:13 PM, go to the gymnasium and observe _______ intervention.” Your more detailed, day-to-day schedule is created by you,
since you know your school best!
Click through the tabs below for scheduling ideas that may jumpstart the scheduling process (Intervention Central, 2018;
Massachusetts Department of Elementary & Secondary Education, n.d.):  
Thirty to forty- ve minutes are set aside each day
for Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions. Students
receiving only Tier 1 support can continue in their
normal routines.
Schedule Tier 1 and Tier 2 activities at the
same time in a “block opportunity." This can be
enrichment for students only receiving Tier 1
supports, such as re-reviewing core concepts
and applying them. For students receiving
Tier 2 support, this can be instruction and
intervention such as extra instruction for
students that focuses on their limitations in an
intervention with a variety of personnel
involved.
Students attend electives before or after
school and use the freed-up time for Tier 2
interventions or instruction.
Students using Tier 2 for academic supports have
their time on speci c academic subjects extended
for the intervention. If needed, you can schedule
longer recesses or lunch times for students
requiring Tier 2 supports so that the intervention
can take place during that extra bit of time.
Coordinate a study hall with Tier 2 interventions.
While students receiving only Tier 1 services
participate in study hall as usual, students
supported by Tier 2 interventions will use their
study hall time to participate in their
interventions.
Students take a core course online so that Tier
2 support can occur during that class’s in-
person time.
Schedule personnel on a three, four, six, or
eight-day cycle so that there is variety and
respect for teachers’ busy schedules.
It is always helpful to consider how long an intervention’s individual meetings and overall course take to administer when
planning how the intervention ﬁts into the school-day. If you start a schedule for implementing interventions but must change it
due to an online learning day, teacher substitutions, or other reasons, that’s okay! 


Ensuring the Necessary Materials & Resources are Available
Three types of Tier 2 resources needed
 

Communicating with Parents and Guardians
During the time between a student being assessed for Tier 2 services and placed on an intervention, that student's parents or
caregivers should be contacted by the school. You can do this using the communication preferences indicated by the family:
emailing, calls, or in-person chats during pick-up or drop-o . 
To provide the parent or caregiver as much necessary information as possible, it can be helpful to ﬁll out the following form
(attached below) and send it to the parents and caregivers, as well as the student!
Tier 2 Intervention Plan template
Tier 2 Intervention Plan.docx
13.7 KB


Systems for Collecting & Reviewing Tier 2 Data
While we will review progress monitoring and evaluation later on, it is important to have systems in place during installation to
conduct that progress monitoring. That is what we are discussing here!
It is extremely beneﬁcial for students receiving Tier 2 services to have their interventions monitored at least twice a month. This is
