#####
*****
Core MTSS Practices-1.1
This course is designed to provide educators and school professionals with a
comprehensive understanding of core MTSS and integration of school mental
health practices while emphasizing the importance of developing cultural
competence, cultural humility, and fostering strong community and family
partnerships. These practices are a necessary part of creating an inclusive and
supportive learning environment that meets the diverse needs of all students.  
Get ready to embark on a transformative journey that will empower you to build a
more equitable and effective educational experience for your students and their
families. 
Building Supportive Pathways through an MTSS Framework
Using the Tiered Delivery System

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Building Supportive Pathways through an MTSS
Framework
Outcomes:
1. Review the MTSS framework and key terms used throughout the implementation
process
2. Unfold the stages of MTSS implementation and recognize the integrative approach to
establishing mental and behavioral health practices within academic MTSS models 
3. Summarize the elements of an effective, sustainable, comprehensive Multi-tiered
System of Supports 



What is an MTSS Framework? 
Reviewing MTSS
Multi-Tiered System of Supports (MTSS) is a comprehensive, evidence-based framework for
supporting successful student outcomes and eliminating barriers to learning. It is designed to
identify and address the needs of all students, including those who may be struggling
academically and behaviorally, by providing interventions and supports at varying levels of
intensity.
It's important to clarify that the MTSS framework itself is not an
intervention or speciﬁc curriculum. Instead, it serves as a comprehensive
framework that guides schools in selecting and implementing
appropriate curriculum and interventions based on the needs of their
students. The term "comprehensive" refers to a holistic and all-
encompassing approach to addressing the diverse needs of students. A
framework can be thought of as simply a structured guide or roadmap.
In this case, it is a guide to building the comprehensive system that
serves all students and staff.  
The beauty of the MTSS framework is that it is customizable. This means interventions selected
within the MTSS framework can vary widely based on the unique needs and resources of each
school. There is no one-size-ﬁts-all approach. The framework allows for ﬂexibility, enabling
schools to address the speciﬁc challenges their students, families, and school community face.
As long as schools are using a tiered approach with data-informed decision making, evidence-
based practices, and interventions, they are following MTSS. 

To get started, let's take a moment to review a few key
MTSS terms. Flip each card to read the deffnitions.
MTSS is organized into 3 tiers or
levels of intervention. When you
1 of 6
Tier:  MTSS is organized into 3 tiers or levels of intervention. When you hear tiers, you may think of a ranking system. In MTSS, this is not
the case. Every tier is important and deserves careful attention and planning
2 of 6
Intervention: Intervention is something adults put in place to support students. Some interventions are school-wide, and some are for a
group or individual students. They can address the environment, like changing a student's seat in the classroom. 
3 of 6
Intensity: Intensity refers to how strongly we apply the intervention. Increasing intensity can look like more intervention sessions, scheduling
sessions more often, or increasing the number of weeks of the intervention.
4 of 6
Layering: Layering means applying several interventions at the same time. For instance, all students receiving Tier
2 and Tier 3 support have layered interventions, because they are still exposed to school-wide Tier 1 supports
5 of 6
school community: The school community includes students, families, general and special education teachers, classroom assistants, administrators, paraprofessionals, office staff, custodial staff, cafeteria staff, bus drivers, academic and behavior interventionists, school mental health staff (counselor, psychologist, social worker), school nurses, athletic coaching staff, after-care staff, and community stakeholders.
6 of 6
Fidelity: Fidelity refers to how closely we are practicing the intervention as it was originally developed. When we stick to the intervention (or have high fidelity), we can be more confident that we are addressing the student's issue. If we have low fidelity, or make changes to the original intervention, it may not work as intended or be as effective as possible. 



The Tiered Approach
In the "All Hands on Deck" course, you learned about the tiered infrastructure of the MTSS. The
tiered approach is a central component of MTSS and involves organizing support and
instruction into multiple levels or tiers, each with different levels of intensity and speciﬁcity.
Flip the cards for a quick review.
1 of 3
Tier 1: Universal Supports, This tier focuses on providing high-quality instruction and interventions to all students. It
includes evidence-based teaching strategies, differentiated instruction, and ongoing progress monitoring to ensure that students are
making adequate academic and behavioral progress.
2 of 3
Tier 2: Targeted Supports, Students who require additional support beyond what is provided in Tier 1 receive targeted interventions and supports in Tier 2. These interventions are more individualized and intensive, targeting specific areas of need. Examples of Tier 2 interventions may include small-group instruction, mentoring programs, or social, emotional, and behavioral interventions. 
3 of 3
Tier 3: Intensive Supports, Students who require the most intensive level of support receive individualized interventions and supports in Tier 3. These interventions may involve one-on-one instruction, specialized assessments, and intensive interventions. Students in Tier 3 often receive support from specialists such as special education teachers, counselors, or interventionists. 

At every tier, educators, administrators, and support staff collaborate to select evidence-based
practices that develop skills for groups and individuals. This approach ensures systematic and
focused support for students with diverse academic and behavioral requirements. It
acknowledges the varying needs of students and provides appropriate interventions to improve
overall outcomes.

What does this mean for your school district?
Using the MTSS framework gives schools the power to connect education, health, and mental
health systems to support successful students, schools, and communities. The tiers within the
MTSS system arrange equitable, streamlined, and proﬁcient planning and delivery of services
within the schools. By using the framework in this way, schools can maximize effciency and
support the needs of all students.
Watch the video below as Dr. Lucille Eber, a project coordinator with the Midwest Positive
Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) Network and a collaborative partner with the U.S.
Department of Education’s National PBIS Center, sums up the MTSS framework and how it
works. 

How is MTSS different from other systems or initiatives?
MTSS is designed to serve all students through a combination of universal programming and,
as Dr. Eber described in the video above, a "seamless" connection to support based on
individual student needs. Supports are layered or intensiﬁed based on individual student
strengths, needs, and progress, as well as the overall school community.
MTSS differs from other systems in key ways:
comprehensive and integrated approach
emphasizes data-informed decision making for targeted interventions
fosters collaboration through a team-based approach involving professionals from various
disciplines
takes a proactive stance by aiming to prevent diffculties before they escalate,
distinguishing it from reactive frameworks focused on disciplinary actions or remediation
This multi-faceted approach distinguishes MTSS from other systems that may have a narrower
focus or lack integration across various domains.
Let's listen in some more as Dr. Eber describes how tiered supports should look and feel within
MTSS.  
Many of us have seen initiatives in education come and go. The MTSS framework is
different because it organizes the adults and available resources to meet the needs
of the school population. When district initiatives change, the MTSS framework
remains allowing for consistency and sustainability. 




Practical Steps for Implementing MTSS
Implementing MTSS practices, whether a district is at the beginning or integrating school
mental health into an existing academic multi-tiered system, requires careful planning,
collaboration, and a systematic approach. 

New to MTSS?
Some districts may be at the beginning stages of developing an MTSS infrastructure. In this
case, here is a "to do" list.
1. Establish a leadership team: Create a dedicated leadership team comprising
administrators, teachers, counselors, and other relevant stakeholders to drive the
implementation process. 
2. Develop a shared vision and goals: Clearly articulate the vision, goals, and expected
outcomes of the MTSS implementation. This shared vision will guide decision
making and provide a common understanding among all stakeholders. 
3. Assess readiness and capacity: Evaluate the readiness and capacity of the district,
including available resources, professional development needs, and infrastructure.
This assessment will help identify areas that require additional support or
investment. 
4. Prioritize the foundational components: Focus on establishing the core
components of MTSS, such as high-quality differentiated instruction, meaningful
assessment and progress monitoring, and evidence-based practices. Begin with a
universal framework.
5. Build a data system: Develop a comprehensive data system to collect, analyze, and
use data effectively. This includes implementing data collection tools, establishing
data protocols, and training staff to interpret and utilize the data for decision
making.
6. Provide professional development: Offer ongoing professional development to
educators to build their knowledge and skills in MTSS implementation. This may
involve training on data-informed decision making, instructional strategies,
behavior management, mental health literacy, and collaboration among staff.

That's a big list! But all of this is accomplished in stages of implementation, an effective process
of supporting the long-term commitment of MTSS (National Implementation Research
Network, 2018). Read through the suggested steps of the implementation process below. This
will guide the district in completing that long to do list in a structured feasible manner. 



Stages of Implementation
Scroll through to review the suggested steps of the implementation process. This will
guide the district in completing that long to do list in a structured feasible manner.

Step 1
Exploration
The exploration stage assesses the district's needs, the ﬁt of the proposed evidence-
based practices, and the practicality for implementation. If exploration leads to a
decision to proceed, installation planning commences. 
During this stage, teams may ask themselves:  
- What is MTSS?  
- What will it take to implement a comprehensive multi-tiered system of support
in our school or district?  
- How will we assess our readiness for change so we can eliminate barriers that
may prevent successful implementation?

Step 2
Planning
In the planning stage, leadership teams devise strategic plans to acquire necessary
resources for designing an effcient multi-tiered support system. This includes steps
like providing initial staff training and setting up performance assessment tools
before effective implementation can occur. Set up your infrastructure with
appropriate teams, data systems, and an implementation checklist. 
During this stage, teams may ask themselves: 
- What are our goals, and do we have a deﬁned action plan?
- What early professional learning needs to occur to build the foundation for
implementation?  
- How will we measure success?  
- How do we engage all stakeholders in understanding the relevancy of this work? 

Step 3
Initial Implementation
Next, schools and districts begin to implement a multi-tiered system of support. The
initial implementation phase sets the foundation for the ongoing MTSS process.
Several key activities and steps are typically undertaken to establish the framework
and begin providing targeted support to students including ongoing staff training,
developing intervention implementation teams, resource allocation, data collection
and analysis, tiered design based on data, curriculum adjustments, etc. The speciﬁc
steps and activities may vary based on the school's context, needs, and available
resources. After you have built capacity, try out the practices, learn, and improve. 
During this stage, teams may ask themselves:  
- What structures are in place (e.g., new schedules) to support early
implementation changes? 
- How do we support early innovators with robust scaffolds and supports such as
PD and coaching?  
- How are we using data to drive our work?   
- How much time is provided for early adopters to collaborate and reﬂect on their
new practices? (Senge & Kleiner, 1999). 

Step 4
Full Implementation
Full implementation is reached when 50% or more of the intended practitioners,
staff, or team members are implementing the identiﬁed strategies with ﬁdelity and
seeing strong outcomes for all students. 
During this stage, teams may ask themselves:  
- How will we scale up the professional learning options to meet the needs of the
early adopters as well as those just beginning?  
- How are we using data to reﬁne our system of support?  
- How do we maintain a focus on this work through transitions in leadership?  
After successful implementation, repeat the process with more partners, programs,
and practices! The MTSS process involves continuous monitoring, evaluation, and
improvement to support the success of all students. 


Here is a useful resource from the American Institutes of
Research (AIR) as your district begins MTSS
implementation!

Implementation
Understanding the essential components of MTSS is an important part of its
implementation, but research suggests effective implementation is a major
challenge for educators. Successful implementation of MTSS demands ongoing
planning, continuous improvement, and sustaining and expanding efforts.
READ MORE MTSS4SUCCESS 


Already Have a Multi-tiered System in Place?
Many schools already operate with a preventive, multi-tiered approach to academic
performance (Response to Intervention) or behavior (Positive Behavioral Interventions and
Supports). That's great! This means there is already a foundation in place to integrate a
comprehensive school mental health system. That's right! The multi-tiered approach you are
using applies to mental health too. Here's how!
Implementing a Comprehensive Integrated Multi-Tiered
System of Supports
The MTSS framework is already structured to include policies and interventions that promote
positive student outcomes, prevent problem behaviors, and address factors that put students at
risk. Additionally, an effective MTSS offers early identiﬁcation and support for students who are
at risk of developing mental health issues. 
Integrating school mental health practices into an academic multi-tiered system involves a
systematic process that recognizes the importance of addressing students' positive health and
wellbeing alongside their academic needs. Click through the tabs for an overview of important
steps to consider in this process.

Assess the Current State –
Begin by assessing the current state of the academic MTSS framework and the existing supports
for students' mental health. This includes reviewing the data on student well-being, behavior,
and social-emotional needs, as well as evaluating the effectiveness of any existing mental health
initiatives or interventions.
Establish an MTSS Mental Health Team –
Create a collaborative team consisting of school administrators, teachers, counselors, school
psychologists, social workers, and other relevant stakeholders. This team will be responsible for
planning, implementing, and evaluating the integration of school mental health practices into the
MTSS framework.
Identify Mental Health Needs and Resources –
Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment to identify the mental health needs of students, staff,
and the broader school community. This assessment may involve surveys, interviews, focus
groups, or data analysis. Simultaneously, identify existing mental health resources and supports
available within the school or the community, such as counselors, therapists, or partnerships
with external organizations.
Align Mental Health Practices with MTSS Tiers –
Map out how school mental health practices can be integrated within the existing MTSS
framework. Identify speciﬁc strategies and interventions that can address students' social and
emotional needs at each tier of support (universal, targeted, and intensive). Ensure that mental
health practices are aligned with the academic supports already in place and that they
complement each other.
Develop a Comprehensive Plan –
Based on the needs assessment and alignment with the MTSS framework, develop a
comprehensive plan for integrating school mental health practices. This plan should include
speciﬁc goals, action steps, timelines, and responsibilities for implementation. Consider
strategies such as school wide positive health and wellbeing programs, individual and group
counseling, peer support systems, trauma-informed practices, and family engagement
initiatives.
Enhance Professional Development –
Provide ongoing professional development and training for school staff to equip them with the
knowledge and skills necessary to implement School Mental Health practices effectively. This
training may cover topics such as trauma-informed care, mental health literacy and awareness,
crisis intervention, and effective communication strategies. Foster a culture of support and
collaboration among staff members to promote a holistic approach to student wellbeing.
Foster Collaboration and Communication –
Establish channels of communication and collaboration among the mental health team,
academic MTSS team, and other stakeholders involved in supporting student well-being.
Regularly share progress, exchange feedback, and make data-informed decisions to strengthen
the integration of school mental health practices and continuously improve the overall support
system.
Evaluate and Reffne –
Conduct ongoing evaluations to assess the impact of the integrated school mental health
practices on student outcomes, well-being, and academic success. Seek feedback from students,
staff, and families to gather perspectives and identify areas for improvement. Use evaluation
ﬁndings to reﬁne and enhance the integrated approach over time.

With a strong commitment, schools can effectively integrate school mental health practices
into an existing academic MTSS, creating comprehensive school mental health practices that
support students' positive health and wellbeing alongside their academic growth. This
integration recognizes the interplay between mental health and academic success, promoting a
positive and inclusive school environment for all students.



The Interconnected Systems Framework: What the SBHA is All About!
The foundation for all the work of the School Behavioral Health Team at the University of South
Carolina is the Interconnected Systems Framework (ISF), involving an education-mental health
system partnership to add resources to schools from collaborating community mental health
organizations, and focused speciﬁcally on strengthening districts and schools' MTSS. 
Within an interconnected system, education and mental health leaders and practitioners have
time, space, and funding to plan together, combine resources, and use evidence-based
structures and systems to strengthen community practice.
ISF is a blueprint for building a collaborative mental health and education system. Download the
fact sheet below that focuses on the core features of the ISF approach. 
When School Mental Health is Integrated within an MTSS.pdf
585.2 KB
The ISF in Practice
Take a few minutes and watch the video below explaining ISF and the value of integrating
mental and behavioral health supports. The speakers are Tami Morrow, Jennifer Nelson and
May Henry, all of whom are experienced working within the Interconnected Systems
Framework.
In an interconnected system, all children and families will be able to engage with well-matched,
high-quality educational, mental, and behavioral health programs and services more easily and
quickly than ever. The ISF blueprint grows and adapts with you, the young people, families,
dedicated practitioners, and researchers working with us.
It is the view of the SBHA team that MTSS is best operationalized by the Positive Behavioral
Interventions and Supports (PBIS) evidence-based tiered framework with emphasis on high
quality practices —  effective teams, data-informed decision making, screening and follow-
up to it, implementing and reﬁning evidence-based practices, and progress monitoring
across Tier 1 (promotion/prevention for all students), Tier 2 (early intervention for some
students, classroom supports), and Tier 3 (more intensive individual, group and/or family
intervention). Click here for more information about PBIS.
While in our view, it would be optimal for SC school districts to adopt the PBIS framework,
this is not essential as schools are able to embrace other aspects of effective MTSS
functioning. A critical factor will be having an inclusive and interdisciplinary team, ideally
including student and family voice, intentionally focused on improving the social-
emotional-behavioral functioning of students thus improving academic performance, and
systematically organizing and providing infrastructure for the MTSS. 
Integrating mental health practices into an MTSS is an
important step in promoting the overall well-being and
success of students. Click on the locations along the
roadmap for the basics of effective comprehensive
school mental health within an MTSS.
Commitment:
A successful integration of behavioral health services will require the commitment of district community
leadership teams that seek wide-scale adoption of comprehensive school mental health systems.
Funding:
Diverse and leveraged funding and continuous monitoring of new funding opportunities from national,
state, and local sources to support a sustainable comprehensive school behavioral health system.
Tiered System:
A full array of tiered, evidence-based processes, policies and practices, a MTSS, that promotes mental
health and reduces the prevalence and severity of mental illness by ensuring mental health and behavioral
interventions, just like academic instructional interventions, are available in varying intensities.
Resource Mapping:
Resource mapping offers schools and districts a comprehensive view of school and community services
and resources available to students and families. Having a systematic process that helps individuals better
understand specific details about the types of services offered, and how and when they can be accessed,
can improve student follow-through with services and coordination of care. You will learn more about
resource mapping in the Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment lesson coming up!
Evidence-based Practices:
Use of evidence-based and emerging best practices to ensure quality in the services and supports provided
to students.
Data-informed Decision Making:
Use of data to monitor student needs and progress, assess quality of implementation, and evaluate the
effectiveness of supports and services.
Screening:
Use of screening and referral as a strategy for early identification and treatment. We will discuss more
about screening later in this course! 
Well-Trained Educators and Specialized Support Personnel:
A full complement of school and district professionals, including specialized support personnel, who are
well-trained to support the mental health needs of students in the school setting. Teams also include
representation from mental health community partners working cohesively to broaden the availability of
support to students and families, enhancing access to mental health care. The roles and responsibilities of
community partners will differ based on unique resources and needs of schools, and are determined by
leadership teams.


We Are Here for You! 
The roadmap may be intimidating - building and sustaining an MTSS is no easy task! That's where the rest of this course comes in. As you progress, you will gain operational knowledge of the following MTSS practices: 
1. Using the Tiered Delivery System
2. Team-based Leadership
3. Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment
4. Data-informed Decision Making
5. Screening for Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Functioning

During the implementation of MTSS, schools must purposefully foster a sense of support and inclusivity for
all individuals. As such, to examine this further we included lessons in: 
1. Strengthening School-Family-Community-Partnerships
2. Cultural Competence in the School Setting

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- High-quality differentiated instruction: this component emphasizes the
importance of tailoring instruction to meet the diverse needs of students.

- Meaningful assessment, screening, and progress monitoring: To effectively
implement MTSS, schools need to have robust assessment systems in place. This
includes conducting universal screenings to identify students who may require
additional support, as well as regularly monitoring students' progress to determine
if interventions are effective. Assessment data can inform decision-making and
help educators identify the speciﬁc needs of students, leading to targeted
interventions.

- Identifying, selecting, translating and evaluating evidenced-based prevention and
intervention programs and practices: Schools implementing MTSS need to identify
and select appropriate evidence-based prevention and intervention programs and
strategies that align with the needs of their students.

- Professional development: Teachers and staff need training on topics such as
differentiated instruction, assessment and progress monitoring, mental health
literacy, selecting and implementing evidence-based practices, and intervention
ﬁdelity. Professional development equips and empowers educators with the
knowledge and skills necessary to support the needs of their students.

- Intervention ﬁdelity: As you know, implementing interventions with ﬁdelity refers
to ensuring that interventions are delivered consistently and as intended.

- Establish channels of communication and collaboration among the mental health
and academic MTSS teams: Regularly share progress, exchange feedback, and make
data-informed decisions to strengthen the integration of school mental health
practices and continuously improve the overall support system.

Addressing these core components establishes a strong foundation for implementing an
effective and sustainable MTSS. This comprehensive approach ensures that all students receive
high-quality instruction, targeted interventions, and the support they need to thrive
academically, behaviorally, and socially.
When done well, MTSS will have a positive impact on you, your
students, and your school community. 
Now, let's get started!

@@@@@
Lesson 2 of 2
Using the Tiered Delivery System

Using the Tiered Delivery System
Outcomes:
1. Explore practical applications of the MTSS framework
2. Walk through MTSS implementation speciﬁc to each of the three tiers
3. Recognize the importance of layering support from each tier based on students'
individual needs
MTSS in Action
Exploring Practical Applications of the MTSS Framework
Person driving using GPS mounted on the dashboard
Theory into practice
Putting the MTSS framework into practice requires a systematic and collaborative approach
involving educators, administrators, support staff, parents, and the wider school community.
Now that we have covered the basics of an MTSS framework, let's explore its practical
applications.


Aligning Support With Student Needs
Aligning support with student needs within the tiered approach of the MTSS framework
promotes personalization, targeted intervention, effcient resource allocation, preventive and
early intervention, student engagement, and a positive school climate. By understanding and
responding to the unique needs of students, educators can provide the right support at the right
time, maximizing student success and wellbeing. 
Selecting Evidence-based Interventions Across Tiers
The number of available evidence-based practices can be extremely overwhelming. We will talk
in more detail about the term "evidence-based" in just a moment, but for now, let's look at
some strategies practitioners use when looking to choose the most appropriate ones.

Match the intervention with the current problem.:
Selected intervention should be designed for the identiﬁed problem. Special attention should
be given to evaluating the effectiveness of the intervention for your students and the current
issue to be addressed (Merrell & Buchanan, 2006). This means regularly assessing progress
to ensure that the chosen strategies are having the intended impact. 

Consider modular vs. manualized interventions.:
Manualized interventions with pre-made lessons can help take the guesswork out of
intervention planning and practice. Qualiﬁed staff can simply follow the lessons. However,
these types of interventions typically need to be followed completely. This can be time-
consuming, or it may not be feasible in some situations.  
Using modular behavior strategies have been found to help teams target speciﬁc issues and
combine strategies as needed. In a randomized control trial of a modular treatment for
children with depression, anxiety, and conduct problems, the modular treatment was more
effective than other standard evidence-based treatments (Weisz et al., 2012). A more in-
depth exploration of manualized vs modular intervention approaches for Tier 3 intervention
practitioners can be found in the SBHA "Growing Your Tier 3 Supports" course.

Compare open source vs. proprietary programs.:
Another concern when selecting interventions is cost. Proprietary programs can be
expensive and usually require instruction from their own trainers. The good news is there
are many evidence-based interventions that are offered at little or no cost! Using
interventions available in the public domain avoids expensive and time-consuming
trainings, subscriptions, and losing access to materials if the subscription is not renewed.

Once the MTSS team has selected interventions, the process does not stop there! Because MTSS
is a data-informed framework, teams can choose to change interventions if things are not
working as expected.
The Importance of Using Evidence-based Practices
It is the responsibility of the MTSS team to review the available evidence-based practices and
interventions that line up with the identiﬁed needs of the students. The term evidence-
based comes up a lot when we discuss MTSS. This means understanding and using
instructional practices, interventions, and approaches grounded in research that have
demonstrated effectiveness in addressing speciﬁc challenges while promoting student learning
and achievement. Watch this short video as Kelly Perales, Co-director of the Midwest PBIS
Network, explains more about evidence-based practices.
As Kelly mentioned in the video, evidence-based interventions are an important piece of getting
to the intended outcome for our students, whether it's to improve their school attendance,
reduce their depression symptoms, or teach them how to positively seek attention from adults
and peers at school. 
You also heard again about the importance of ﬁdelity, the degree to which interventions and
practices are implemented as intended. If intervention ﬁdelity is poor and students are not
making progress, it's easy to get frustrated and want to give up. Making sure there are solid
ﬁdelity measures guarantees accurate implementation of interventions and positive outcomes.
The importance of ﬁdelity in all aspects of the MTSS framework cannot be stressed enough. It
ensures that students receive the intended beneﬁts of the interventions and helps maximize the
effectiveness and impact of school-based mental health support. When interventions are
implemented with ﬁdelity, educators can accurately assess their effectiveness, monitor student
progress, and make informed decisions about adjustments or modiﬁcations.
Combining evidence-based practices with ﬁdelity within the MTSS framework ensures that
students receive high-quality interventions that have a proven track record of success. This
approach promotes consistency, accountability, and continuous improvement in supporting
the academic, behavioral, and social-emotional needs of all students.

Moving Through the Tiered System
Guidance at Each Level
Educators can better navigate the pathway to effectively meet the diverse needs of all students
by understanding the levels of support within the tiered approach. Let's take a short walk
through each tier of the MTSS framework and discuss the keys to optimizing educational
outcomes for every learner and pitfalls to avoid during implementation. 

Building the Foundation With Tier 1
The foundation of the MTSS framework is Tier 1. When your universal Tier 1 supports are
strong, most students are getting what they need. If there is a long line of students outside the
administrator's offce most days, that can be a clue that your Tier 1 may need more attention!
Perhaps the needs of the student population have changed, or there is a problem with ﬁdelity. In
any case, the MTSS team should review the data and ﬁnd out what needs to be addressed.
We all can agree that in every school "building a positive school climate is a central task and
involves the entire school community" (Bradshaw et al., 2009). For this to happen, Tier 1
activities must include programs that promote family and student engagement, cultivate
awareness and adherence to school-wide expectations, and incorporate practices to improve
overall wellbeing and alleviate stress among administrators, faculty, staff, and students.
Tier 1 activities happen consistently, not only in the classrooms but in a school-wide fashion,
with buy-in and support from school administrators. For example, some schools hold weekly or
monthly "town hall" style meetings. These can be a great way to bring the school community
together to discuss important topics such as mental health literacy and behavior expectations
while celebrating students who show positive behaviors. Think beyond a pep rally-style
gathering here. While we can have fun and create excitement about school spirit, we can also be
intentional about using evidence-based curriculum materials to teach positive social,
emotional, and behavioral skills.
If you are wondering how to fft these Tier 1 activities
into an already busy school day, check out the ideas
below!
- The morning meeting/advisory period are opportunities for intentional
community-building activities. Activities can include relationship-building and
sharing activities, reviewing classroom and school procedures, and mini-lessons
on character development and mental health literacy.
- School counselors can be a great resource for games and activities to use with
students.
- Talk with the media specialist about a related book to use during an English
Language Arts (or other content area) lesson. This is one way to infuse social skills
instruction into required academic content blocks. Time is our most precious
resource, so accomplishing two goals with one lesson is a win for everyone!

Consider including older students in the discussion, where developmentally appropriate and
with family approval. Students themselves can offer powerful insight into what they think they
need to be successful!
Overhead image of a group of students standing in a circle with arms linked
Implementing Tier 1 MTSS programming can be complex, and schools may encounter challenges that can hinder its effectiveness. Watch out for these common pitfalls of Tier 1 implementation.
- Tier 1 is more than hanging up a poster! While posters can be great instructional tools and reminders around our school building, they do not take the place of consistent, school-wide instruction with an evidence-based social skills curriculum.
- Tier 1 cannot be implemented well for your unique school population without planning. The planning stage is one of the
most crucial aspects of Tier 1. Your MTSS team is compiling data, completing a needs assessment, and thinkingcritically about the needs of
your students and families.
- Setting up Tier 1 supports is not a one-time task. As our populations and their needs change, so also
should we look at our data to see if the needs and interventions still fft. If not, our MTSS team goes back to
the needs assessment and makes changes based on the ffndings.

To address these pitfalls, schools should provide ongoing support and professional
development, establish clear expectations and guidelines, foster a collaborative culture, allocate
adequate time and resources, utilize data effectively, and ensure a sustained commitment to Tier
1 implementation. 


Tapping Into Resources
Implementing Tier 1 programming involves collaborative effort from within and outside of the
school building. By tapping into these combined resources, schools can effectively establish a
strong foundation for all students, promoting their well-being and academic success. 
Here are some insightful tips to help identify and effectively use available school community
assets as well as external community resources. 
Use the Resources Around You –
Don’t forget to build on all the resources in your school community. Support staff like your
school counselor, psychologist, and social worker often have great ideas to support the school
climate!
Seek Extra Materials –
School counselors usually have extra materials and information to support their guidance
lessons. For secondary students, school counselors can point you in the direction of other social-
emotional resources. Don't forget to ask for their help!
Keep an Open Mind –
Be open to the richness of the vast resources within the full school community. 
Stay in Tune with the Community –
You may also ﬁnd great resources outside of the school building via community partners (e.g.,
recreational centers, faith-based groups, non-proﬁts, businesses).
Essentially, a successful MTSS relies on a strong Tier 1 foundation to create a nurturing,
responsive, and inclusive educational environment that beneﬁts all students. By focusing on
universal supports, schools lay the groundwork for effective intervention, collaboration, and
continuous improvement, ultimately leading to better outcomes for students and the
sustainability of the MTSS framework. If you recognize that your school needs to build or
enhance practices at Tier 1, we've made it easy for you to gain more detailed information! Be
sure to take our SBHA course "Building the Foundation at Tier 1."


Bridging Supports With Tier 2 
A cartoon river and trees that says "Tier 2."
Now that your Tier 1 supports are strong and functioning well in your school, most of your
students are getting what they need. They are following school and classroom procedures and
making academic and social progress. However, you will have students who need additional
supports. This is where we provide Tier 2 supports.

Getting Tier 2 Support
Requesting assistance for a student who may need Tier 2 supports can come from a variety of
sources. Families, classroom teachers, or other school staff can reach out for support if they
have concerns. Other sources, like school discipline records or a social and emotional screening
measure, can also suggest that some students may need extra help. 
If the MTSS team believes a student needs Tier 2 interventions, the next step is gathering
baseline data. A staff member, usually the classroom teacher, gathers data on the concerning
behaviors of the student. This allows the MTSS team to know how the student's behavior looks
now and how it is impacting their academic and social skills. Sometimes, baseline data can be
surprising! The concerning behavior may need to be addressed, but at times the data shows us
that it is not as bad as we thought. Allow your team to go where the data takes you!
The most important thing to consider when referring a student to Tier 2 MTSS intervention is
the availability of the data that supports the need for additional support. It is imperative to
gather and analyze relevant data, such as academic assessments, behavior observations, and
progress monitoring, to ensure that the student meets the criteria for Tier 2 interventions. This
data-informed decision making process helps ensure that students receive the appropriate level
of support and that interventions are targeted toward their speciﬁc needs.
If the baseline data shows a consistent behavior issue that needs an intervention, the team can
select an evidence-based intervention and track the student's progress. When appropriate
supports are in place, progress monitoring should be fast and simple. You will ﬁnd more
information about progress monitoring in the lesson titled "Data-informed Decision Making."

Applying Tier 2 Strategies
Identifying a speciﬁc student need is central to choosing a corresponding support or strategy.
For example, small skill-building groups are one type of Tier 2 strategy used to address needs
ranging from social issues (e.g., friendship building), to family concerns (e.g., children coping
with divorce), to academics (e.g., work completion). 
What might this look like when put into action? 
At some schools, the school counselor may see a group of ﬁve students two days a week for
twenty minutes to teach friendship-making skills. The counselor may also visit classrooms or
recess to help students practice their skills in real-time. To collect progress monitoring data,
the counselor could ask the classroom teachers of the students to ﬁll out a quick electronic
form at the end of each day or week to rate their social skills.
Another example might be a school's use of Check-In/Check-Out (CICO). You might have heard
of CICO, a very popular and effective Tier 2 intervention. CICO is a structured system of daily goal
setting, data collection, and debrieﬁng.  
According to Filter and colleagues (2022), the 5 main practice elements of CICO are:
1. Pre-teaching with the student
2. Morning check-in
3. Teacher rating and feedback
4. Afternoon check-out
5. Home communication
You will have the opportunity to learn more about CICO in the Tier 2 course, but you can
download the following fact sheet from Vanderbilt University CICO resources for a breakdown of
the steps and a sample behavior chart.

Challenges When Implementing Tier 2 Supports
Take a look at some common issues with implementing CICO and other Tier 2 interventions.
Flip the ﬂashcards below for some strategies to address a few common pitfalls of Tier 2
interventions.
1. Not enough adult support: When thinking about stafffng needs for Tier 2 interventions, consider
helping students form relationships with other adults in the building.
Offfce staff, cafeteria staff, and other staff are all great choices!
2. Think beyond the classroom teacher: In some cases, classroom teachers may not be the best
choice to facilitate an intervention. For example, if a student participating in CICO
doesn't earn their reward, it may be hard on the student-teacher relationship. Another
adult may be a better choice to facilitate CICO.
3. Don't forget to have back-up: With so many stafffng issues, it's
important that we have back-up for our intervention facilitators. We
know consistency is best, so we want to be able to continue the
intervention even when some staff are absent for a day or two.
Let's connect with Cat Raulerson, trained school psychologist and part of Florida's PBIS Project,
as she explains where Tier 2 level supports ﬁt in.
As Cat explains, Tier 2 works in conjunction with Tier 1 and Tier 3. It is the important middle
ground so that students don't fall through the cracks.

Duration and Data-informed Decision Making at Tier 2
When we talk about intervention implementation and ﬁdelity, we
may wonder about the optimal amount of time for maintaining Tier 2
support before determining that there needs to be another course of
action. These next steps might include reducing support, continuing
with universal Tier 1 strategies, changing intervention that may not
be as effective, or increasing support with Tier 3 intervention. 
For academic interventions, state departments of education tend to
recommend 6-8 weeks of implementation before deciding to make
any changes. 
As you know, measuring behavioral skills is not as clear-cut as
measuring academic progress.
When looking at recommendations from U.S. state departments of
education, there is not much agreement on how long students should
stay in Tier 2 or 3, or how often we should collect data (Briesch et al.,
2019). When measuring behavior, remember that environmental
factors like time of day, how hard the student thinks a task is, and
peer inﬂuences can have big impacts. Data collection and review
might need to happen more often than it would when measuring
academic progress. The team can then use the data to decide on the
next steps. Here are a few ways this might look:
If the data shows the following:
TABLE HERE

Remember that this process doesn't have to go in a straight line! Although we
typically want to move from Tier 1 to Tier 2 to Tier 3, in keeping with the student's
data, there may be emergency or complicated situations where the team jumps to a
higher level of support. It's about meeting the student where they are. 

Where Do FBAs and BIPs Fit in Here?
Shifting our focus from academic interventions to behavioral interventions, we encounter a
distinct challenge in evaluating progress and determining the most effective strategies.
Functional Behavior Assessments (FBAs) are Tier 2 and Tier 3 tools where data is collected on
“ABCs” of the problem behavior (antecedents, behavior, and consequences). FBAs help us learn
what may be triggering the problem behavior and see things in the environment that reinforce
or make the behavior happen more often. Although FBAs are frequently conducted in schools
and are mandated under certain circumstances for special education students, there is little
guidance from most state departments of education on the required components for FBAs. 
In a survey of practicing school psychologists (Johnson et al., 2019), these were the most
common pieces of FBA data:  
Based on the FBA results, the team can come together to develop ideas about the function of the
behavior (e.g., attention, escape, etc.) and targeted strategies or interventions to address the
problem. Think about making an FBA a group effort for the MTSS team, rather than having one
person gather all the information. This makes the process more effcient and allows for
different perspectives on the student's behavior. As a result of the FBA, one intervention might
be a behavior intervention plan (BIP) that includes:  
- Adding environmental supports to prevent the problem behavior as much as
possible
- Teaching the student more appropriate replacement behaviors that have a similar
function (such as adult attention) to the problem behavior 
- Reinforcing positive behaviors
- Using consequences carefully to make the problem behavior less effective in meeting the student's needs

Tip: When developing replacement behaviors, think about what your students are
ready to learn. Often, students need to be taught skills that lead up to bigger skills.
For instance, if we want a student to play in a developmentally appropriate way with
others, we might need to teach them how to take turns ffrst.
To summarize Tier 2, it is for the purpose of identifying and responding to student needs in a
timely manner, implementing small group interventions, supplementing core instruction,
monitoring progress, fostering collaboration, and maintaining ﬂexibility. When a student
requires more focused support beyond the universal level, the MTSS framework process of
increased intensity at Tier 2 will contribute to reducing academic and behavioral diffculties. See
the complete Tier 2 course, "Bridging Supports with Tier 2" for more detailed information on
Tier 2 practices and resources.


Growing Your Tier 3 Supports
Tier 3 is our most intensive level of support. Interventions are individualized to reach students
who have not responded as we hoped to Tier 1 and 2 supports. At Tier 3, teams should look
carefully at what is driving a student's problem behaviors so the root cause can be addressed. As
we said earlier, an FBA is one useful tool to gather more in-depth information about student
behavior and the factors inﬂuencing it. 
At the heart of Tier 3 is individualizing our approach. Because students in need of Tier 3 support
did not pick up social and coping skills from the school-wide Tier 1 instruction or Tier 2 skill-
building groups, we need to go deeper and really tailor our intervention to the unique needs of
the student. The last course, "Growing Your Tier 3 Supports," will provide detailed information on
Tier 3 interventions and practices for the behavioral and mental health practitioners and staff in
your school and community.
Tip: Remember that students do not exist in a bubble! They are a part of families,
schools, and communities. Be sure to learn about their experiences and strengths.
You can build upon these skills while working on problem behaviors.

Communicating With Families About Students' Needs
Families might be worried about the amount of time it takes to carry out interventions and look
for progress. Families care about their children and want to see them do well. At times, their
worry may come across as frustration. Your school team may ﬁnd it helpful to include families
in decision making meetings to discuss intervention planning for their child. Involving families
also helps build collaboration between home and school as we work together to support
students' learning and behavior skills. Families can give input on: 
- what they think their child needs
- what works at home
- their child's likes and dislikes

Below are some effective ways to keep families informed about student progress. Click for
details about each suggestion. 
Behavior charts –
Track a child's behavior daily or weekly using a behavior chart. These can be paper or electronic.
You may wish to take a photo or make a copy of paper charts for the child's data collection ﬁle
before sending them home.
Electronic forms –
Electronic forms can be created and completed by school staff. You can share the data from these
forms with families via email.
Notes in the agenda book –
If your school provides agenda books, you can write families a quick note there. As with paper
behavior charts, you can keep a copy or photo to add to the student's data collection ﬁle.
Texts/emails/phone calls –
Texts, emails, and phone calls are all great ways to update families on student progress. Be sure
to check in with families about their communication preference so your messages reach them.
We should also include positive communications with families. A quick phone call or text to
highlight how a child handled a tough situation or used a new skill can be so powerful!
Tip: Automate reminders wherever you can! Scheduling alarms and calendar alerts
for yourself and your colleagues can help us be consistent with our communication
with families and each other.



Layering Tiered Supports
Balancing Support from Each Tier
When all tiers of MTSS are fully operational, there is a lot going on at once! Tier 1 supports are
always happening at the school-wide level to reach every student. For students receiving Tier 2
and Tier 3 interventions, there are additional layers of support happening for them, in addition
to the Tier 1 supports. Once a student moves to Tier 2 or 3, Tier 1 does not stop for them. The key
concept of the tiered approach is that supports are layered, and as students move through the
tiers, they receive increasingly individualized and intensive interventions while continuing to
beneﬁt from the foundational supports.
This approach acknowledges that students' needs exist on a continuum and may require
different levels of support at different times.

Teaming for Student Success
Clear and consistent communication about student progress is key to identifying any potential
issues and keeping the system running. We have to communicate with one another for MTSS to
work.
Regular, brief meetings including classroom teachers, administrators, school mental health
support staff (counselors, psychologists, social workers), and other interventionists are
incredibly important for sharing data, problem-solving as a group, and discussing the student
holistically. 
Below we have provided the Team Implementation Checklist (TIC; Sugai et al., 2011). It is a free
online tool to assess teaming structures in your school and identify areas of strength and places
to improve. Click below to check it out! We will also discuss teaming in much more detail in the
next lesson Team-Based Leadership!

Remember that MTSS in your district and school will change and evolve over time. As the needs
of students and families change, so will the interventions and implementation. Change is a part
of the process.  Listen to Kiana Longnecker, behavior support consultant, as she gives some
very encouraging closing remarks about implementing MTSS tiered supports.

Let's review the lesson.
- The tiered system of support emphasizes early intervention and support, ensuring
that students receive the assistance they need before challenges escalate. By
implementing MTSS, districts can create a responsive and inclusive educational
environment that maximizes student success.
- The practical application of the tiered approach involves continuous progress
monitoring to assess student performance and determine appropriate levels of
support. Data-driven decision making guides educators in identifying students who
require additional intervention and adjusting strategies accordingly. 
- Collaboration and coordination among educators, support staff, families, and
community resources are essential for successful implementation. Communication
and information sharing enhance the support provided to students, ensuring a
comprehensive approach to addressing their academic, behavioral, and social-
emotional needs. 
- All tiers of support within the MTSS framework are intended to work collaboratively
and complement each other to provide a comprehensive system of support for
students.
EXIT COURSE




*****
Core MTSS Practices- 1.2
This course is designed to provide educators and school professionals with a
comprehensive understanding of core MTSS and integration of school mental
health practices while emphasizing the importance of developing cultural
competence, cultural humility, and fostering strong community and family
partnerships. These practices are a necessary part of creating an inclusive and
supportive learning environment that meets the diverse needs of all students.  
Get ready to embark on a transformative journey that will empower you to build a
more equitable and effective educational experience for your students and their
families. 
Team-Based Leadership
Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Team-Based Leadership
Outcomes:
1. Review the beneﬁts of team-based leadership within MTSS
2. Identify team members and central activities of the District Community Leadership
Team (DCLT)
3. Examine school-based leadership team roles and responsibilities
4. Discover best practices for team meetings and team-based problem-solving
5. Recognize how district-school collaboration impacts MTSS quality and sustainability



Together is Better
A Team-Based Leadership Approach to Implementing Core MTSS
It's always better to travel together. 
When you don't have to rely on yourself for everything from Point A to Point B, you get where
you're going faster and safer. That's why teams, especially among leadership, are a core part of
developing the MTSS roadmap. 
What does this mean practically? 
MTSS is not just about tiered interventions. It is about how all the systems (district, schools,
families and community) connect to ensure high-quality education for all students. 
A team-based leadership approach means building a strong team with a shared mission and
commitment. It involves bringing together important people from the school and community
who are affected by the outcomes in the school. These people are also known as stakeholders!
Stakeholders come together to talk about ideas, set goals, ﬁnd opportunities, solve problems,
and make decisions. 
The main goal of team-based leadership is to work together and achieve shared objectives. 
Within a strong, effective team, you can typically see three primary characteristics:
Consistent and Relevant Communication –
This approach includes coming together at the same time and sharing information with all
members. What is going to be done? How is it going to be done? What is the purpose of the
group's efforts? With a solid, agreed-upon vision the group is motivated individually and
collectively. Clear and transparent communication accelerates understanding and allows the
team to move forward with uniﬁed goals. 
Mutual Accountability –
Within a team-based leadership approach, roles and responsibilities are assigned collaboratively.
Effective teaming includes holding each other accountable and showing personal investment by
engaging, acting, and providing support. This accountability contributes to cohesiveness within
all systems and ensures initiatives are carried out with ﬁdelity. Accountability drives change. 
Shared Commitment –
The team is fully committed to identifying and solving problems. Those identiﬁed as "team
leads" have been designated with the authority to make sound decisions, act, and get things done
faster. It is key to have a team with the power to implement policy and procedural changes. 

The success of a MTSS framework within a school district relies on building a leadership team
that promotes thoughtful, effective, and sustainable implementation of MTSS practices
and strategies throughout a school district.
It is imperative that MTSS leadership teams exist at each part of the system (state,
district, and school building) and are committed to consistent, long-term implementation
of MTSS.
Let’s now move forward and look at teams at two distinct yet interconnected levels: the district
and the school.  




The District 
The Strong Foundation On Which School-Level Teaming Stands
While your school setting may seem like the starting point for teaming, teaming actually starts
at the district level! The district level team, also known as "District Community Leadership
Team" or DCLT, supports the school-wide teams through resources, policies, and open
communication!  
Think of your DCLT as the place you go to get the tools needed to build the roadmap. The unique
features of the DCLT is that it, and the individuals on it, have the responsibility to: 
- reallocate resources  
- change policy  
- sustain and scale the key elements of the MTSS
A DCLT is strongest when it is built on the principles of representation and collaboration. The
remainder of this lesson will provide resources and information to inform your identiﬁcation of
DCLT members and identify tools to support strong district/school MTSS collaboration. To
start, we will break down who is on the team before moving onto the functions of the team and
then how to implement those functions effectively.  

Who is on the DCLT?
Whether you are an existing member of a leadership team or a champion for MTSS in your
building, having a keen awareness of the functions of the DCLT is key as this team actively
supports and guides MTSS implementation efforts across all Tiers. An understanding of who is
on the team is the starting point for knowing what that team's function is!   
As the name implies, the DCLT includes representation from both district leaders and
community partners. A DCLT includes partners who have a shared commitment and can make
decisions that support positive outcomes in the schools and the community.  
You may already have a group that resembles a DCLT but call it by another name, and this is
totally ﬁne! It is always good practice to assess your existing resources and see how you can
blend or adapt them to the MTSS framework.  
To complete the mission, the team needs to have representatives from all key stakeholders.
Let’s take a closer look now! 

What is Meant by "Stakeholder(s)"?
In general, a "stakeholder" refers to any person or group who is positively or negatively
impacted by a project, initiative, policy or organization. They could be internal (people within
your organization) or external (people outside of your organization). In the implementation
of an MTSS framework, stakeholders are those most impacted by the outcomes. Diverse
stakeholders include district-level administration, school-level representatives, students,
families, and community partners.

Identifying and Recruiting Key Stakeholders
The composition of your stakeholder group will depend on the unique context of your school
community. Seek out individuals who can serve as champions and critical friends, who can
bring diverse skills and perspectives, and who can serve the school in a variety of capacities. 
The number of stakeholders should be large enough to include an array of perspectives, but
small enough for all stakeholders to make meaningful contributions to the process.
Think about the students that your school serves and make certain that the stakeholder
group includes representatives who can speak authentically to their perspectives and needs,
particularly those who have been historically marginalized (African American/Black, Latinx,
English learners, students with disabilities, etc.). 

Here are a few tips for gathering stakeholder input suggested by the Massachusetts Department
of Elementary and Secondary Education's Turnaround Practices. 

Turnaround Practices
Tip 1
Seek Input Early
Begin seeking stakeholder input early in the process of planning so that stakeholders
can make recommendations to inform the direction and priorities of your plan.
Tip 2
Conduct a Series of Meetings
Many districts and schools gather stakeholder input through a series of meetings,
which provides ample time for discussion of context, challenges, and opportunities. 
Tip 3
Facilitate
When convening discussions among groups of stakeholders, consider identifying a
skilled facilitator to guide the group's discussion and to document group
recommendations. Whenever communication is a barrier, there should also be an
interpreter available to support stakeholders not ﬂuent in English 
Tip 4
Share Meeting Information
It has proven to be important for meetings to include a published/shared agenda,
attendance records, notes/minutes, and a written set of recommendations, all
translated to support stakeholders who are not ﬂuent in English.
Tip 5
Employ Other Strategies to Gather Input
Teams may also choose to engage with stakeholders through focus groups, surveys,
interviews, or other methods appropriate to their context and needs.
Tip 6
Maintain Ongoing, Two-Way Communication
Stakeholder input should not end once a plan is written. Include stakeholders in the
vision-setting process. Identify ongoing opportunities to share information about
MTSS with the school community, and to receive formative feedback from your key
stakeholders as implementation progresses.

All Done!
Now that you have a better picture of who is on the DCLT, it’s time to examine the function of
the DCLT! 

How Does the DCLT Work With MTSS?
District administrators have a process to identify organizational readiness for implementing or
improving MTSS and/or integrating mental and behavioral health support into an existing
academic, tiered system. To ensure implementation, this process begins with an overarching
commitment to a strong and effective MTSS, clarity about the current status, and establishing a
focused mission.  
Work within the district team is focused on these 3 critical organizational needs (National
Association of State Directors of Special Education Blueprint, 2008):  
- Consensus: First, MTSS concepts are communicated to those who will be
implementing practices. This is where the “whys” are discussed and embraced.
Districts must then arrive at consensus regarding the importance of adopting and
integrating the MTSS framework and commit to the principles and practices that
guide implementation.  
- Infrastructure: Districts and their schools assess their existing practices/policies
against the essential components of MTSS, identify practices that are working well
and align with the framework, and address identiﬁed practice gaps. Infrastructure-
building focuses on closing these practice gaps.  
- Implementation: Structures and support are put in place to implement and
formalize MTSS practices with sustainability as the key consideration.
Now that there’s a foundation of who is on the DCLT and how the DCLT interacts with MTSS,
let’s move on to look at the speciﬁc functions of the DCLT. Before that, take a few moments to
reﬂect on the following questions:   
What leadership teams exist in your school district?
Are there other community organizations, state agencies, or
champions that could be added?
Are roles and responsibilities clearly deﬁned and in alignment
with a shared mission?
These questions allow you to assess the existing leadership teams and their collaboration
mechanisms in supporting student success. Considering the potential involvement of other
community organizations, state agencies, or champions can uncover untapped resources and
opportunities for strengthening your MTSS efforts. Evaluating the clarity and alignment of roles
and responsibilities among team members is crucial in fostering a cohesive and uniﬁed
approach, ensuring that everyone is actively working towards the shared mission of promoting
student success through MTSS. By engaging in this reﬂective process, you can identify areas for
improvement, enhance collaboration, and optimize the effectiveness of your MTSS team
leadership. 


What Are the Core Functions of the DCLT?
While each district has differences in the makeup of the leadership team, the primary functions
of the DCLT are often similar when the decision is made to adopt a comprehensive multi-tiered
framework. Let's look at a breakdown of district team responsibilities. 
In other words, let's look at what tools the DCLT offers in the roadmap creation process!
Stakeholder Support –
The DCLT creates opportunities for each partner to share their perspectives and knowledge on
academic, behavioral, and mental health needs and priorities, and to develop potential action
steps to advance the MTSS. The strength of the DCLT lies in strong, positive, and ongoing
collaborative partnerships.  
District leaders reach consensus and continuously advocate for policy change and funding
opportunities that can promote high-quality and sustainable school behavioral health. By
frequently communicating outcomes with stakeholders and celebrating successes (for example,
sharing innovative approaches to service provisions) the DCLT works to inﬂuence more
supportive policies and increases needed funding.  
When the DCLT can "communicate a clear, common vision and belief for intervention which
expresses a movement from compliance to commitment to the process as well as awareness and
support for resources needed to successfully implement and continue the use of interventions," it
builds a commitment in the community (SCMTSS, Framework, and Guidance Document, 2019). 

MTSS Alignment –
To ensure MTSS alignment across the district, the DCLT may set school team expectations for
interventions, data collection, and evaluation methods that assess and address student needs at
whole-school, small group and individual levels. 
The team guides and supports schools as they partner with families and community
organizations to integrate mental health services into the MTSS. The DCLT efforts promote
consistency across these contexts and areas of support for programming to be successful. 

Building and Strengthening Workforce Capacity –
The DCLT makes sure the system has the workforce necessary to implement and sustain the
MTSS by: 
- enhancing the existing workforce 
- expanding or clarifying roles and functions 
- investing in the schools’ infrastructure with support where/when needed 
- augmenting the existing resources and services available to ensure the work gets done 

Provide and Promote Professional Development –
The DCLT coordinates professional development so that all staff members are using common
MTSS language and strategies to support student academics and behavioral health and well-
being and provides additional instruction for educators and practitioners of students with more
intense needs.  
The district team will provide ongoing data-informed professional development activities that
align with core student goals and staff needs.  
Districts can develop standardized training for schools, encourage and advocate for access to
appropriate technology and its use, and provide ongoing technical assistance and resources. 
The DCLT provides overall funding and support for staff training including speciﬁc training in
school mental health topics and interventions. (SCMTSS, Framework, and Guidance Document
2019).

Coaching Support –
The DCLT utilizes systems coaching, a dynamic, supportive process to facilitate and assist the
district teams to build capacity to implement MTSS in alignment with district improvement
plans to enhance student academic and behavioral health outcomes. 
Click here for a "Systems Coaching and Leadership" fact sheet.

Evaluation, Feedback and Problem Solving –
The DCLT is responsible for decisions such as procedures for the evaluation of implementation
and outcomes. DCLT provides ongoing problem solving to support an effcient and effective
system. The team is responsible for regularly analyzing program information and making data-
informed decisions with a focus on continual improvement. 

What now?
The DCLT is in place with stakeholders identiﬁed and invited, and what the DCLT does when it is
fully functioning is established, so what happens next?   
You'll hear more about the difference between "engagement" and "inclusion" in the lesson,
"School-Family-Community Partnerships." For now, just know that the goal with engagement
is moving towards working "with" teammates and not "for" them. Engagement underscores
authentic partnerships with organizations, agencies, and nonproﬁt groups within the DCLT. 
All valuable collaboration starts with meaningful relationships. Building and strengthening
relationships begins with the coordination of teaming efforts. Creating a welcoming and
organized environment for community partners is critical for sustainability and progress
toward goal attainment.   
Let's watch the next video featuring Andrea Peyton, a
community health director and DCLT member, sharing
her experience and tips. 
As Andrea Peyton said, being a partner is a journey, not something that just happens. Take a
moment to download and review the DCLT Early Decisions Checklist below. This will help you
ﬁnd the guideposts of progress when creating or participating in a DCLT! 

Where are you in the Process?
In the very ﬁrst lesson, you reviewed the four stages of MTSS implementation: exploration,
planning, initial implementation, and full implementation. No matter where your school or
district is starting from, there is an implementation entry point—even better, there are
resources to help you ﬁnd it! 
Let's hear Ashley Greenwald, an assistant professor and Board Certiﬁed Behavior Analyst,
discuss the Initiative Inventory Tool, a free resource available to assist district teams exploring
MTSS in the video below!
Ashely describes the Initiative Inventory as “wildly helpful” because it helps schools
understand each different initiative and intervention, how it needs to be implemented, and how
it can be monitored. This is a great tool if you don’t know what your DCLT’s entry point into
MTSS implementation is! 
You have a good picture of team-based leadership and district-level responsibility to create the
framework and supports for schools in the implementation of MTSS. Now, let's explore
leadership teaming within the school buildings. First, a knowledge check!




The School Level
Fostering a Culture of Collaboration and Teamwork by Providing
Opportunities for Educators to Share Ideas, Strategies, and Resources
School level MTSS teams promote school-wide competence of multi-tiered practices and
interventions. Here, the roadmap is actually being created. To create a roadmap for MTSS,
school teams must examine a school's capacity and readiness, develop plans, create structure
and process, and conduct ongoing evaluation and review of efforts, with active involvement of
families and community partners in the work. 
This is the point at which a theory or idea is put into practice. The roadmap is actually being
created and then used. For the MTSS framework, the school-building is where it all happens.
The lion’s share of the MTSS work is carried out at the school level, but more importantly, it is
most impactful at the school level. The school team is the voice of the building to the district.
Let’s look at the roles and responsibilities of that team in greater detail now!

Roles & Responsibilities: School Leadership Team
Members of the teams should function with a shared vision for facilitating the MTSS. The
members should be representative of the school and community and lead implementation
efforts, including administrators, families, and school personnel who are skilled and
understand the multidisciplinary needs of the whole child— academic, behavioral, and positive
health and wellbeing. Click through the tabs below to read more about their roles and
responsibilities. 


School Building Team Members, Roles, and Responsibilities
The MTSS teams include administrators, families, and school personnel who are
skilled and understand the multidisciplinary needs of the whole child— academic,
behavioral, social, and emotional. Click through the MTSS team members to read
more about their roles and responsibilities.
Example Roles and Responsibilities # 1
School Administrators
The principal ensures there is an MTSS team to design the school-wide
implementation process, progress monitoring protocols, and data collection
procedures. They also conduct frequent systematic data conversations with team
members.  
The principal: 
- oversees MTSS implementation in the building  
- makes sure there is a time during the day for staff to attend MTSS team meetings  
- ensures that the meetings occur regularly, and all relevant personnel are in attendance 
- attends MTSS meetings and/or selects MTSS administrator designee to 
		a. examine data and instructional practices at the Universal/Tier 1 level  
		b. facilitate problem-solving using school-wide data to guide instructional decisions 
		c. monitor ﬁdelity of instruction and intervention implementation at Tier 2 and Tier 3 
		d. communicate with DCLT, families, and the community 
- ensure that faculty and staff have access to relevant professional development
and technical assistance related to MTSS implementation 

Example Roles and Responsibilities # 2
School Counselors
As a primary resource for administrators, teachers, and parents regarding mental
health awareness, school counselors implement school counseling programs
addressing the needs of all students. School counselors deliver instruction, appraisal,
and advisement to students in all tiers and collaborate with other specialized
instructional and intervention personnel, educators, and families to ensure
appropriate academic and behavioral supports for students within the school’s MTSS
framework. 
According to the American School Counselor Association, school counselors align
with the school’s MTSS by:
- providing all students with standards-based school counseling instruction to
address universal academic, career, and social/emotional development and
analyzing academic, career, and social/emotional development data to identify
students who need support
- identifying and collaborating on research-based intervention strategies
implemented by school staff
- evaluating academic and behavioral progress after interventions
- revising interventions as appropriate
- referring to school and community services as appropriate
- collaborating with administrators, teachers, other school professionals, 
 community agencies, and families in MTSS design and implementation 
- advocating for equitable education for all students and working to remove
systemic barriers

Example Roles and Responsibilities # 3
Teachers and Instructional Staff
Within the MTSS, all instructional staff: 
- provide high-quality standard-based instruction and interventions with ﬁdelity  
- implement selected schoolwide evidenced-based practices with ﬁdelity  
- collect data on the effectiveness of Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 interventions
(progress monitoring)  
- collaborate in problem-solving efforts to determine interventions and supports  
- implement strategies, support, and plans for small group and individual students
- ensure that appropriate data are provided to request assistance for students and
to use in problem-solving meetings  
 
continuously engage and inform parents of student progress 

Example Roles and Responsibilities # 4
School Psychologists
School psychologists play an integral role in promoting and supporting competency
development within the core components of MTSS, including data-informed decision
making, evidence-based interventions, implementation ﬁdelity, and consultation
and collaboration (National Association of School Psychologists, 2020). In MTSS,
data-informed decision making includes universal screening of all students,
implementation of evidenced-based interventions at multiple tiers, and ongoing
progress monitoring to inform the decisions at each tier. A problem-solving process
supports ongoing evaluation of the data in order to make timely and ongoing
informed decisions (Gresham, 2007).  
School psychologists 
- attend DCLT and MTSS school leadership team meetings 
- contribute expertise in data interpretation and analysis, progress monitoring,
and effective problem-solving.  
- administer diagnostic screening assessments assist in observing students in the
- instructional environment assist in designing interventions matched to student
needs, based on data  
- assist with the identiﬁcation of appropriate interventions and progress
monitoring  
- consult with the school-based leadership team and school staff regarding MTSS
needs 
- provide consultation and support to the school throughout the problem-solving
phases 

Example Roles and Responsibilities # 5
Community Mental Health Clinician
The school mental health clinician is a key member of both the MTSS team and the
school culture. Their visibility and voice on this team and throughout the building
communicates the importance of mental health across all tiers of the MTSS.  They
function as not only a referral source for students and families with more intensive
needs, but also as a consultant for wellness efforts across the tiers.   
School mental health clinicians: 
- attend all MTSS meetings 
-cprepare and report on qualitative and quantitative progress data on students and
families receiving intensive support 
- facilitate problem solving, offering key insights on the impacts and potential
root causes of internalizing and externalizing behaviors 
- identify and collaborate on research-based intervention strategies implemented
by school staff 
- support problem-solving and mediation for educators 
- lead and plan professional development related to individual and systems level
mental health and wellness strategies  
- facilitate small groups related to prevention, intervention, and postvention
support 
- continuously interact with and engage families at both the community and
individual level 
A barrier that is often encountered by clinicians in the school setting is lack of a sense
of belonging. For clinicians to be an effective teaming resource and not just a referral
source, there must be intentional effort to both educate them on the language of
education and the MTSS framework, while integrating them into the broader school-
wide community.   

Example Roles and Responsibilities # 6
Families
Parents and caregivers play a critical role in supporting what their children are
learning in school. Families and caregivers have valuable insights and information
about their children's strengths, needs, and preferences. They can provide critical
information to the MTSS teams about the student's background, interests, learning
styles, and any concerns they may have. This information helps the team create a
more comprehensive support plan.   
For children in Tier 2 and Tier 3 level supports, families should be involved in decision
making by being informed of academic, social, emotional, or behavioral areas that
may need to be addressed. Families should also be informed about how the child’s
progress will be monitored.  
Families can be involved in the MTSS process by communicating any concerns to the
child's teacher, providing insight into their child's learning and development, and
assisting with identiﬁed interventions at home. To participate, parents and caregivers
should have a clear understanding of the MTSS framework. To help families
understand what MTSS is and how it functions, it’s important to explain terms that
may be common to the school but unfamiliar in the home. Here are a few examples:
- Intervention: Consistent, systematic teaching and involvement with a student in
order to improve his or her performance academically, socially, or emotionally.  
- Intervention Plan: The components include an objective, what will be done, who
will do it, how it will be done, when it will be done, when it will be reviewed, who
will review it, and what will happen if the student makes or does not make
adequate progress.  
- Scientiﬁc, Research-Based Instruction: Curriculum and educational
interventions that are research-based and have been proven to be effective for
most students.  
- Universal Screening: A step taken by school personnel three times a year (i.e.,
fall, winter, spring) to determine which students are having diffculties that may
interfere with grasping grade-level instruction, and which students may be
exceeding grade-level. Students whose scores on the screening fall below or
above a certain cutoff point are identiﬁed as needing continued progress
monitoring and possibly more intensive interventions.  
- Progress Monitoring: A scientiﬁcally based practice used to assess students’
academic performance and evaluate the effectiveness of instruction. Progress
monitoring can be implemented with individual students, small groups, or an
entire class.  
- Problem-Solving/Leadership Team: A school-based team that meets regularly
to analyze student data, and to identify student learning and behavior needs in
order to develop interventions. The team, along with the caregivers, make
decisions to determine what intervention may be most appropriate for the
student to make progress.  
Data-Informed Decision Making: The use of data to guide the design,
implementation, and adjustment of instruction. 

Example Roles and Responsibilities # 7
Responsibilities of the School Leadership Team
To promote a healthy school climate, the school leadership team, like any leadership
team, should reﬂect the diversity of the staff, students, and broader community. In
addition, the team members should bring a diversity of skills and expertise to best ﬁll
out the responsibilities of different roles.

All Done!
Here is an example of a school district-developed MTSS team list including members, roles, and
responsibilities from Broward County Public Schools in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida. Download the
PDF below!
BC MTSS Team examples.pdf
Phew! That’s a lot of roles and responsibilities. It can feel very overwhelming, especially if
you’re unsure of where your school currently sits with teams or if you feel overrun by teams in
your school already! Let’s look at this in more depth. 


School Team and Sub-team Structure
Many schools have team structures in place already, often curriculum and instruction teams or
school improvement teams. When building an integrated MTSS, communication is important
both within and between teams. We recommend having one Core MTSS Team and as many sub-
teams as needed by your school.  
A member from each sub-team should be a representative at the Core Team meetings. A sub-
team may work with specialized data to address speciﬁc concerns or plans, and these activities
reach colleagues and the district through the Core Team. The Core Team facilitates cross-
disciplinary collaboration. This structure is especially beneﬁcial for bringing multiple services
to students with complex challenges (without duplication) and for considering multiple
problem-solving perspectives on a single challenge. 
Group of adults seated around a table having a meeting

Developing your school teams: Start where you are.
Identify existing teams in your school building that focus on academics, behavior, and positive
health and wellbeing. Build upon these existing teams when possible and consider recruiting
new members or restructuring a subcommittee from an existing team when needed. 
Otherwise, create necessary teams by engaging those individuals with the knowledge and
expertise to meet the school's identiﬁed MTSS needs.   
Download and review the SBHA School Leadership
Team checklist as a tool to focus your efforts.
SBHA School level checklist
SBHA School Leaders Early Decisions Checklist.pdf
435.6 KB
You will notice that several school level responsibilities mirror those of the DCLT but through
the building level lens.
Keep in mind, one size does not ﬁt all. No matter the size, it is important to recognize what is
feasible in your individual school district and each school building. 
Remember, the MTSS mission in each school, regardless of the number of teams, is to:
- provide all students with an effective, preventative Tier 1 foundation of support 
- respond to student needs for additional supports by understanding root causes
- offer targeted interventions across academics, behavior, and positive health and
wellbeing
- bring data together—a system of exchanging and making effective use of data
- coordinate school-wide practices and expectations
Let’s now look at how DCLT and school leadership teams can work together after this
knowledge check! 


DCLT and School Leadership Teams
Working Together for the Betterment of All
For successful implementation of MTSS, it is critical to establish leadership teams at both
district and school levels. Both teams desire the same outcome: MTSS implementation
throughout their districts, schools, classrooms, and communities. Ongoing collaboration,
coordination, and communication between the school leadership and district leadership are
critical to ensuring that MTSS is achieving that outcome! 
While the district provides the overarching framework, the school leadership must be
responsive while moving forward to ensure that student needs are met, the staff is trained and
supported, and the identiﬁed components of MTSS are in effect. 
Let's look at the difference between the district and school teams more in depth now!

District and School Team Distinction
Take a moment to review the graphic below which
depicts the objectives for each team in a Venn diagram. 
Venn diagram depicting district and school leadership MTSS responsibilities 
As you can tell from the Venn diagram, there is a lot of overlap between DCLT leadership and
school leadership. However, they are still unique from one another! 
TABLE HERE
School and district leaders must continuously communicate and engage in ongoing study and
analysis of data in order to improve instruction, intervention, and assessment. When MTSS is
implemented with ﬁdelity, it is the students and staff who beneﬁt.
The above information was adapted from original materials provided by the Washington
State Offfce of the Superintendent of Public Instruction. Original materials may be
accessed here.
Let’s move forward to some practical tips and resources you can use to maximize the
effectiveness of your teams after a knowledge check! 



Practical Tips for Teams
Making the Most of Your Time Together
Traveling with others, no matter how close you are with them or how well constructed the
roadmap is, can be diffcult. Complications arise, plans change, and sometimes attitudes or
behaviors clash.  
We know that teaming can be complicated. After all, teams are made up of multiple individuals,
coming together from different backgrounds, roles, and ultimate desired outcomes. It makes
sense that it would be diffcult! To help navigate teams and avoid potential complications,
review the following sections on effective team meetings and Team-Initiated Problem Solving
(TIPS)!

Effective Team Meetings 
Sometimes it may seem like there is a never-ending cycle of meetings. Too many meetings leave
staff exhausted and questioning, "what is the point?" Holding too many meetings leads to
discouragement and "meeting fatigue." Below are a few tips to help alleviate the stress caused
by meetings and ensure their effectiveness.  
-Meet Regularly: Create a consistent meeting schedule for your team based on the school's particular needs.
Regularly scheduled meetings on a speciﬁc day and time signal importance and encourage
attendance and participation. Consistency also promotes preparation and focus. 
Assign tasks: Depending on the primary focus of your team, roles within the team may look different.  Here are
examples of general member tasks and responsibilities that will promote smooth effective team
meetings: 
	a) Meeting Facilitator: Creates the agenda and guides the meeting process; manages
	discussions and decision-making activities. 
	b) Meeting Recorder: Records minutes highlighting decisions, tasks and actions.   
	c) Data Lead: Prepares and disseminates visual representation of key data prior to meeting.  
	d)Timekeeper: Moves agenda forward and watches time. 
-Prepare an agenda: Prepare an agenda and distribute it to the team in advance. Also, be prepared to display the agenda
for all team members to view during the meeting. Helpful features of an agenda include time
allotment for each item and team member names for those leading each discussion topic, if
different from facilitator. There should be time allotted for any new or unexpected information,
but before each meeting, members should identify and gather necessary materials to support
team decision making.   
In the next video, Principal Jordan Surdam discusses
how her school leadership team functions to get the
most out of their meetings through their MTSS efforts.
Now that you’ve reviewed how to have effective team meetings, let’s move on to examine how
we can be better problem solvers as a team!   

Team-Initiated Problem-Solving (TIPS)
If only problem-solving during meetings was an easy process! As you've probably experienced
yourself at one point, there are barriers to conducting effcient problem-solving meetings
including:
- limited time scheduled for meetings
- gaps in foundations (e.g., location, team members, procedures, the effciency of meetings)
- an unfocused or unidentiﬁed purpose for meeting
- inadequate training and support to implement effective and effcient problem solving
Solving the challenges that come along when schools are trying to improve outcomes for
students and practices for educators has to be done by using a data-informed decision making
process. Data-informed decision making is important because it ensures that the problems are
clearly and accurately identiﬁed, and speciﬁc targeted solutions can be applied. 
TIPS is a scientiﬁcally based approach for data-informed decision making. TIPS is applicable
for varied data sources, content areas (e.g., academics, behavior), and levels of application (e.g.,
school, district, state). 
The TIPS framework addresses barriers by breaking down problem-solving into six critical
steps to guide teams through a data-informed decision making process that leads to desired
outcomes.  
1. Identify a problem with precision: Teams identify who, what, when, where, why,
and current level for every problem that requires a solution  
2. Identify a goal for change: Teams set a goal that deﬁnes levels at which the problem
is no longer a problem  
3. Identify solution and create a plan: Teams brainstorm
solutions and decide what they are going to do to bring about desired change (i.e., meet their goal)
4. Implement the solution with high integrity: Teams implement and use data to
determine if they did what they said they would do  
5. Monitor the impact of the solution and compare it against the goal: Teams use
outcome data to determine if the solution is having the desired impact on the
outcome/goal  
6. Make summative evaluation decisions: Teams use ﬁdelity and outcome data to
determine what to do next
If you'd like a more in-depth overview of TIPS, watch the
video below!
TIPS Framework 1/8: TIPS Process Overview
TIPS Framework 1/8: TIPS Process Overview
You can also use the attached link below to review the TIPS practice guide for data teaming and
making decisions. The guide was originally developed for the Center on Positive Behavioral
Interventions and Supports, and it provides guidance for schoolwide PBIS teams. However,
intervention coordination teams, student study teams, and other teams can use it as well. 
Loading…
TIPS includes recommendations on: 
- the foundations needed to organize and run meetings more effciently 
- a process for using data to identify school needs and goals for change as well as for
planning practical and effective solutions, and 
- a process for using, monitoring, and adapting solutions 
We’ve also included a PDF of TIPS meeting minutes that you can use or adapt for your own
meetings! 
TIPS Meeting Minutes Template.pdf
496 KB
Page 1 of 12APRIL2022If you want to see TIPs in action after reviewing the TIPS guide and meeting agenda, feel free to
view these short videos demonstrating teams engaged in the TIPS approach to MTSS meetings.
TIPS Training Meeting 1
TIPS Training Meeting 1
A Team Using TIPS: Grade Level Meeting
A Team Using TIPS: Grade Level Meeting
  
As you can see, these videos put the theory you’d been reading about into motion! 
If you’re thinking about implementing the TIPS process, it is critical that teams are
supported by a coach who has been trained in the TIPS framework. They can facilitate the
ffrst two meetings, provide prompts and guides, and support the team by monitoring their
ffdelity and providing feedback. 
You’ve worked through a lot of material on teams! Be proud of yourself. All that’s left is a
knowledge check before the review, and you’re on your way to “Resource Mapping and Needs
Assessment”!

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- Teams at the district and school level are made up of stakeholders, such as school
administrators, family members and caregivers, educators, school psychologists
and more
- The DCLT’s responsibilities include ensuring MTSS alignment in the district,
increasing stakeholder support, allocating resources to schools as needed 
- The school leadership team focuses on, among other things, MTSS implementation
within the building, providing evidence-based interventions, and reviewing that
implementation is done with ﬁdelity 
- Effective meeting practices involves a regular meeting schedule, clearly assigned
tasks, and clear agendas; TIPS can also be implemented for extra support
Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment



@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment
Outcomes:
1. Describe the purposes and beneﬁts of resource mapping and needs assessment
2. Explore how resource mapping and needs assessment can advance school mental
health systems, including access to high quality programs and services
3. Reﬂect on a strategic abandonment tool for sunsetting programs that are not working
for your school or district
4. Connect resource mapping and needs assessment goals
Resources in the School Setting
Illuminating the Path to Enhanced Student Support and Wellbeing
In the school setting, there are numerous resources available to support mental health. These
resources can be mapped, expanded, or reviewed as part of a resource mapping process for
effective behavioral health systems. 
Examples of these resources include school counselors who provide support and screening,
 school psychologists who provide assessments, mental health clinics and practitioners who
offer specialized services like therapy and psychiatric evaluations, peer support programs that
empower students to provide support to their peers, crisis intervention teams trained to
respond to mental health emergencies, and mental health awareness programs that reduce
stigma and promote mental health literacy. Additionally, community partnerships with local
mental health agencies, online resources and apps, support groups, and initiatives involving
parents and caregivers can also contribute to a comprehensive mental health support system in
schools.   
Visualize these resources with the table below. 
- School-based Mental Health
- Academic Enrichment Programs
- RBHS
- After School Programs
- School Counseling
- Tutoring
- Crisis Teams
- Support Groups
- Crisis Hotlines
By identifying and leveraging these resources, schools can build a strong foundation for
addressing students' mental health needs.

What is Resource Mapping?
Resource mapping refers to the process of identifying and cataloging the resources available
within a school or educational system to support students' mental health and wellbeing. It
involves systematically gathering information about the existing resources, services, and
programs related to mental health, both within the school itself and in collaboration with
external organizations or agencies.  
Resource mapping is a systems-building, expansion and review
process. There are many useful products that can be created during this
process. One of the most common products is a detailed "map" that
visually represents available resources (e.g., programs or services),
along with details about service features, accessibility, and associated
personnel. A comprehensive resource map should have information
about internal and external assets.   
Internal assets are resources available within the organization or system itself, such as
school personnel, programs, facilities, and policies. External assets are resources
obtained through partnerships with outside organizations, such as community clinics,
government agencies, universities, and parent/community involvement. 
Within MTSS, resources can be mapped across the tiers to better meet students' needs. It's
important to create resource maps speciﬁcally designed for students and their parents or
caregivers to address a range of mental health needs. Because resources and needs change, be
mindful to conduct resource mapping with some regularity. An annual review process is a great
starting goal.

Why is Resource Mapping Important? 
Thoughtful resource maps give school staff, students, and families a better understanding of
available resources and services! 
Having valuable resources strategically mapped can improve communication, collaboration,
problem-solving, and access to the most helpful programs and services. Resource maps help
teams avoid duplicating services, minimize confusion and stress for service users, and maintain
records of program or service usage, popularity, evidence base, and local outcomes. 
By strategically mapping valuable resources, schools can enhance communication,
collaboration, problem-solving, and access to the most helpful programs and services.
Resource mapping is invaluable for schools connecting or collaborating with external programs
and services, including social services, behavioral health services, and community programs. 
In order to embark on effective resource mapping, it's important to know where and how to
start. The following section will provide guidance on initiating the resource mapping process
and maximizing its beneﬁts within the school setting. 

Resource Mapping: Where and How to Start 
If you were just introduced to resource mapping for the ﬁrst time, you may be wondering how
or where to start. Consider the following questions as a starting point for your resource
mapping journey. 
Use the click-through picture to get a better look at
these questions. 
What are your goals and objectives?
Clarify the specific purpose of your resource mapping efforts. Are you looking to identify gaps in mental
health services, enhance collaboration with community organizations, or improve access to resources for
students and families? Clearly defining your goals will guide your resource mapping process.
Who should be involved?
Identify the key stakeholders who should be part of the resource mapping process. This may include
school administrators, teachers, counselors, support staff, students, parents, and community partners.
Engaging a diverse range of perspectives will enrich the mapping process and ensure comprehensive
coverage of resources. 
What resources already exist?
Take inventory of the resources that currently exist within your school or educational system. This
includes internal assets such as staff expertise, programs, facilities, and policies, as well as external assets
like community partnerships and available services. Documenting and categorizing these resources will
form the foundation of your resource map.
What resources are needed?
Assess the needs and gaps in your school's mental health support system. Consider the specific challenges
or requirements identified by students, staff, and families. This will help you identify the types of
resources and services that need to be mapped and prioritized. 
How will you gather information?
Determine the methods and tools you will use to collect information about available resources. This may
involve surveys, interviews, consultations with stakeholders, or research on existing programs and
services. Explore both online and offline sources to gather a comprehensive understanding of the
resources available in your school community. 
How will you organize the information?
Decide on the structure and format of your resource map. This can be done using digital tools,
spreadsheets, or even physical maps. Consider categorizing resources based on different criteria such as
type of service, target population, location, or availability. Visual representations, such as color-coding or
symbols, can make the map easier to understand and navigate.
How will you maintain the information?
Establish a plan for regularly updating the resource map to ensure its accuracy and relevance. Assign
responsibilities for maintaining and reviewing the information and establish a process for incorporating
new resources and removing outdated ones. This will help ensure that the resource map remains a
valuable tool over time.
By considering these questions and following a structured approach, you can lay the
groundwork for an effective resource mapping process. Remember, resource mapping is a
dynamic and ongoing endeavor that can lead to improved support systems and enhanced
outcomes for students and their wellbeing. 

Resource Mapping: A Dynamic and Customizable Process
Resource mapping is a process, meaning that it involves a series of systematic and organized
steps to identify, document, and analyze available resources. Resource mapping is not a one-
time event but rather an ongoing and dynamic activity that requires continuous assessment and
updating. 
The process of resource mapping typically includes activities such as identifying goals and
objectives, engaging stakeholders, gathering information about existing resources, assessing
needs and gaps, organizing and visualizing the information, and maintaining the resource map
over time. These steps help ensure that the resource mapping effort is thorough,
comprehensive, and responsive to the evolving needs of the school or organization.
The graphic below demonstrates a resource mapping process plan. Take a close look. What
might you add or change if you were doing this at your school or district? For example, if your
school already has a map for academic resources, you may want a planning step to review,
combine or expand the existing resource map!
IMAGE HERE
A list of steps for resource mapping

Resource Mapping Practice Guides
Resource mapping practice guides provide valuable guidance for effectively conducting resource
mapping in various contexts. These guides offer step-by-step instructions, best practices, and
practical tips to support individuals and organizations in their resource mapping endeavors.
When you utilize these guides, you can navigate the resource mapping process more effectively
and maximize the beneﬁts of this strategic approach to identifying, utilizing, and enhancing
available resources.
Resource mapping encompasses four key practice steps.
Click on each tab below to investigate these steps in
detail.
Step 1: Pre-Planning –
Gather a pre-planning team. Choose team members with a range of leadership roles in your
school who can quickly identify critical needs and comprehensive resources. Key leadership roles
usually include administrative leadership, school psychologists, student services coordinators,
case managers, teachers, and mental health counselors. With your team, discuss your resource
mapping goals and create a plan to achieve those goals. 
See the Pre-Planning worksheet to help you structure your pre-planning meeting.
Step 2: Mapping Resources –
Meet with your goal-speciﬁc team (expand as needed). Begin mapping resources as relevant to
achieving your identiﬁed goals. The simplest way to start is to use a spreadsheet program such as
Excel or a table in Word (or other word processor). Digital resources are fast and easy to edit and
print out.
Check out the Categorizing Resources worksheet as a guide to visualize and organize your
information.
Step 3: Analyzing Resources –
Once you have organized, categorized, and documented your relevant resources, it is time to
analyze what you have found and create additional plans and products. When analyzing
resources, keep in mind your goals and consider all appropriate and available data.
See the Analyzing Resources worksheet to guide you in your analyses.
Step 4: Maintaining the Map –
Resource mapping is an ongoing process. It can be used to meet speciﬁc needs more effectively
and effciently over time. You will need to adapt your resource maps (and other products) over
time to meet shifting needs and optimize changing resources. The best resource maps are easily
accessible to all the students, staff, and families who need to use them. Resource maps can also be
instrumental for large-scale decision-making processes, funding, and equity initiatives!
Visit Maintaining Resources worksheet to help in maintaining your resource map.


Resource Mapping Across Tiers
Optimizing Supports for Student Needs
A great way for teachers and other caring adults to use resource maps is to review, select, and
connect with resources that meet their students' needs.
Do your students have their:
- behavioral health
- physical health
- relationship
- academic
needs addressed?
When you identify a student with unmet needs, you can use resource maps to address those
particular needs. For example, for academic needs, you might ﬁnd or create a list of tutors,
after-school activities, and academic enrichment programs. To avoid duplication of efforts, it is
best to communicate about existing resource maps during team meetings and at a range of
school community gatherings.

Enhancing Multi-Tiered Systems of Support (MTSS) Using Resource Maps
Resource mapping across tiers refers to the application of resource mapping at different levels
or tiers within a system. In the context of school mental health, this typically involves
considering resources and supports available at multiple levels of intervention. 
Resources needed to promote mental health and behavioral concerns for all students should be
mapped at Tier 1. Greater intensity and more speciﬁc resources intended for only some students
can be mapped into Tier 2. The most individualized and intensive resources belong to Tier 3. 
Targeted Supports:
This tier focuses on resources and interventions for students who may require additional support beyond
the universal level. It involves identifying resources that are specifically targeted towards a subgroup of
students who exhibit specific needs or risk factors. Examples of tier 2 resources could include small group
counseling, social skills training, or targeted prevention programs. 
Intensive Supports:
This tier involves resources and interventions for students who require intensive and individualized
support. These resources are typically provided to a smaller group of students who have significant mental
health needs. Examples may include individual counseling, specialized therapeutic interventions, or
collaboration with external mental health professionals.
Universal Supports:
This tier includes resources that are available to all students as part of a universal approach to promoting
mental health and wellbeing. Examples may include school-wide mental health awareness programs,
positive behavior interventions, and school climate initiatives.

Organizing programs and services into Tiers and "layering," or offering services
simultaneously, helps to reduce the need for high-intensity services over time and match the
service intensity to the student need! 
Think about your school community's needs and the program's delivery capacity when placing
a program or service into a Tier. Do all or most students need this support at school, or just
some or a few students? Can the program or service accommodate the need?

Locating Resources
Locating resources is crucial for effcient utilization, meeting speciﬁc needs, avoiding
duplication, fostering collaboration, and making informed decisions. It ensures resources are
allocated effectively, provides timely access to necessary support, focuses efforts where gaps
exist, enables partnerships, and supports effective planning. Overall, resource location
optimizes resource utilization and enhances the ability to meet the needs of individuals and
communities. 
There are various ways to locate different services and supports. Please visit the links below to
aid you in locating resources. 



Needs Assessment in the School Setting 
Examining the Current Landscape
Needs assessment plays a crucial role in the realm of school mental health as it provides a
systematic and comprehensive approach to understanding the speciﬁc needs and challenges
faced by students. Conducting a needs assessment in the school setting allows educators,
administrators, and mental health professionals to gain valuable insights into the unique
mental health needs of students while enabling them to develop targeted interventions and
support systems. This process involves collecting and analyzing data to identify the prevalent
mental health issues, risk factors, and protective factors within the school community. 
Through a collaborative and evidence-based approach, needs assessment in the school setting
paves the way for the implementation of effective interventions that address the mental health
needs of students, promoting their overall wellbeing and academic success. 

What is a Needs Assessment? 
A needs assessment is a collaborative process that aims to identify and address challenges and
gaps within an organization, enabling a better understanding of the areas where improvement
or support is needed. Identifying pressing needs can inform quality improvement activities,
intervention selections, resource allocation, and professional development choices in schools,
districts, and state education agencies.
"Assessment is the process of collecting data to make
decisions” (Salvia & Ysseldyke, 1998). 
As stated by Professors Salvia and Ysseldyke, in the context of school mental health, a needs
assessment serves as a comprehensive approach to gathering data and informing decision
making. 
A school conducts a needs assessment to understand the mental health needs of students. The
process begins with gathering data through surveys, interviews, and focus groups involving
students, parents, teachers, and staff members. The assessment examines various aspects,
such as students' emotional wellbeing, prevalence of mental health concerns, access to support
services, and perception of school climate. Based on these ﬁndings, the school identiﬁes
speciﬁc areas for improvement.  
The needs assessment provides valuable insights for the school to develop targeted
interventions, allocate resources effectively, and collaborate with community partners to
address the identiﬁed needs. Regular assessments allow the school to monitor progress, make
necessary adjustments, and ensure continuous improvement in supporting the mental health
needs of their students. 

Assessment Continuation: Comprehensive Evaluation Over
Time in the School Setting 
Assessments are done over a period of time, also called a continuation. A continuation of
assessments within a school could include administrative data review, screening, progress
monitoring, and evaluation. 
Click through the picture below to learn more about the
continuation of assessments. 
Screening:
In the needs assessment process, screening involves conducting school-wide screenings to identify
students who may require additional support. This could include screening for academic, behavioral,
social, or emotional concerns. When schools assess who is and is not responding to the initial supports
provided, they can gain insights into the effectiveness of their interventions and identify areas that require
further attention. 
Progress Monitoring:
Progress monitoring is an essential component of needs assessment. It involves regularly assessing the
effectiveness and fidelity of the interventions (meaning the degree to which intervention is implemented
as originally designed or intended) implemented for students. This could include tracking students'
academic progress, behavioral changes, social, or emotional development over time. Monitoring progress
guides schools to make data-informed decisions, adjust interventions as needed, and ensure that students
are making meaningful gains.
Evaluation:
Evaluation is a crucial aspect of needs assessment that focuses on assessing the overall effectiveness of the
initiatives and interventions implemented within the school. It involves analyzing the data collected,
examining the outcomes achieved, and evaluating the impact of the implemented strategies. Conducting
comprehensive evaluations helps schools to determine the success of their efforts, identify areas of
improvement, and inform future decision-making to better meet the needs of their students.

Beneﬁts of Conducting Needs Assessments 
Conducting needs assessments in the school setting offers several beneﬁts. These assessments
help identify areas of improvement by systematically gathering data and pinpointing gaps in
resources and services. They also allow schools to tailor interventions and support based on the
speciﬁc needs of students, leading to more effective strategies. Needs assessments inform
decision-making by providing data-driven information and help schools allocate resources
more effciently. They promote collaboration among stakeholders and encourage partnerships
for meeting student needs. Additionally, needs assessments help monitor progress, evaluate
outcomes, and drive continuous improvement. Overall, conducting needs assessments
enhances the understanding of challenges, informs targeted interventions, and improves
outcomes for students.
A compass on top of a map
Conducting a schoolwide needs assessment allows you to: 
- identify challenges experienced by most or all students, indicating a need for Tier 1
 programming improvements 
- monitor student progress and growth collectively and for speciﬁc social groups (e.g., by
 age, race, ethnicity, special education, or language status) 
- balance needs and resources equitably 
- set goals for resource mapping and systems-building efforts
Having discussed the beneﬁts of conducting needs assessments in the school setting, it is
crucial to reﬂect on the importance of having a needs assessment speciﬁcally for mental health
in schools. Mental health plays a signiﬁcant role in students' overall wellbeing and academic
success. Understanding and addressing their mental health needs is essential for creating a
supportive and nurturing learning environment. A needs assessment for mental health allows
schools to identify speciﬁc challenges and gaps in mental health support services. It helps in
tailoring interventions and resources to meet the unique needs of students, ensuring that
appropriate and effective mental health support is provided. 
Now, let's take a minute to consider the mental health
needs of students with the reffection questions below. 
- How can a needs assessment for mental health help schools identify and prioritize speciﬁc
 mental health needs among students? 
- In what ways can a needs assessment contribute to the development of tailored and
 effective mental health interventions and support services? 
- How can a needs assessment for mental health foster collaboration and partnerships with
 external agencies and community resources to enhance the overall mental wellbeing of
 students? 
What are some potential challenges or barriers that schools may face when conducting a
needs assessment for mental health, and how can they be addressed? 
By contemplating these questions, you can gain a better understanding of the signiﬁcance of
needs assessments in addressing the mental health needs of students in schools and fostering
a supportive and inclusive learning environment.




Exploring Classroom-Level Needs Assessments 
Distinguishing Whole School and Classroom Needs Assessments
When conducting a needs assessment, it's important to understand the distinction between
assessing the needs of an entire school and assessing the needs of a speciﬁc classroom. While
both approaches share the goal of identifying areas of improvement, they differ in their scope
and focus. 
A whole school needs assessment involves gathering information and data from various
stakeholders across the entire school community, including administrators, teachers, support
staff, students, and parents. This comprehensive assessment aims to capture the broader
needs, challenges, and priorities of the entire school. It provides a holistic view of the school's
strengths and areas for growth, allowing for the development of targeted strategies and
interventions at the school-wide level.
On the other hand, a classroom needs assessment focuses speciﬁcally on assessing the needs
and learning requirements of a particular classroom or group of students. It involves gathering
information about the speciﬁc strengths, weaknesses, and individual needs of students within
that classroom. This type of assessment allows teachers to tailor their instruction, differentiate
learning activities, and provide appropriate support and resources to meet the diverse needs of
their students. 
While a whole school needs assessment provides a big picture view and informs school-wide
initiatives, a classroom needs assessment enables teachers to address the unique needs of their
students in a targeted and individualized manner. Both approaches are valuable and
complement each other in creating a supportive and responsive learning environment. 

Tips for Developing a Needs Assessment 
Embarking on a needs assessment journey is a crucial step towards understanding the
challenges and opportunities within a school community. Developing a comprehensive needs
assessment requires careful planning, thoughtful consideration, and a commitment to
gathering meaningful data. This section will provide you with valuable tips and insights to guide
you through the process of creating an effective needs assessment. By applying these strategies,
you will be better equipped to identify the unique needs of your school, gather relevant
information, and lay a solid foundation for informed decision-making and positive change.
Let's explore the key tips for developing a needs assessment and unlock the potential of your
school. 
When developing a needs assessment, there are several
topics and data sources that you should include. Here
are some meaningful topics to consider. 
- Student stressors and mental health concerns 
- Student academic progress 
- Student, family, and teacher knowledge of school mental health   
- Student and family satisfaction with the mental health services in the school
- Student relationship quality with school staff and peers
- Offce disciplinary referrals
- Attendance data
As you delve into the meaningful topics and data sources outlined here, you will gain valuable
insights that can drive evidence-based decision-making and foster a supportive and thriving
learning environment. Embrace the power of a well-crafted needs assessment and pave the way
for a brighter future for your school.

Sources of Data for a Comprehensive Needs Assessment 
Data for a needs assessment should come from many sources. There are various types of
assessments to evaluate students’ performance and effectiveness of support. There are four key
sources of data to inform your overall assessment: summative assessments, universal
screeners, progress monitoring, and formative assessments. Let’s examine each one of these. 
Investigate different assessment types by ffipping the
cards below. 
1 of 4
Summative assessments are
typically administered at the
end of a unit, semester, or
academic year. These
Universal screeners are also
assessments are for all
administered to every student
students to determine
two or three times a year to
students' academic
monitor students' progress and
performance and progress.
identify potential areas of
These assessments often take
concern. The goal of a screener
the form of exams, ffnal
is to identify areas of support
that are needed. The data
collected from universal
screeners helps educators
2 of 4
3 of 4
Progress monitoring
assessments are given to
students weekly or bi-weekly.
The goal is to examine students'
progress and evaluate the
effectiveness of support.
Progress monitoring is used to
determine whether students
are making adequate progress
toward their goals, identify
Formative assessments are also
4 of 4
conducted in the classroom to
All of these assessment types are used within the MTSS
instructional decisions. These
framework. Take a look at the chart below to examine
how each type of assessment ffts into the MTSS
framework. Click on the chart to enlarge it. 
students' understanding and
assessments aim to measure
provide feedback and inform
progress towards learning
goals and help teachers identify
areas where additional
instruction or support is

TABLE HERE
Summary of the types of assessments used within the MTSS framework 
Given the importance of assessing students' mental
health needs and strengths, it is essential for schools to
consider whether they utilize these assessment types
within the realm of mental health as well. So, reffect on
the following question. 
A group of globes stacked on top of each other
Does your school use all of these assessment types to assess students' mental health needs and
strengths?
Employing a range of assessment approaches, including those that focus on mental health,
helps schools to gain a comprehensive understanding of students' wellbeing, identify areas of
support, and make informed decisions to ensure their overall success and ﬂourishing. 




Empowering Students Through Thoughtful
Assessment and Support 
Guiding Students Toward Success with Compassionate Evaluation
and Strengthening Care
Empowering students to reach their full potential requires a comprehensive approach that
encompasses thoughtful assessment and support. You will now explore best practices for
assessing student mental health needs and strengths. By conducting thorough needs
assessments, educators can gain a deep understanding of students' unique challenges and
strengths, paving the way for tailored interventions. Additionally, it is essential to regularly
evaluate and reassess programs and initiatives to ensure their effectiveness. This section also
emphasizes the importance of sunsetting programs that are no longer serving their intended
purpose, making room for innovative approaches. Let’s get started! 
Best Practices for Assessing Student Mental Health Needs
and Strengths
So far, you have reviewed key assessment types, frequency, and participants in a schoolwide or
classroom needs assessment. You may be wondering about best practices in assessing student
mental health needs.  
Assessing student mental health strengths is a vital component of promoting overall wellbeing
and resilience among students. While identifying and addressing mental health challenges is
crucial, it is equally important to recognize and cultivate the strengths and positive attributes.
Knowing the strengths of students and staff as well as available resources will help you identify
the most effective and effcient improvement goals. 
You will now explore best practices for assessing student mental health needs and strengths. 
See the process plan outlined below for assessing
student mental health needs and strengths. 
IMAGE HERE
Best practices for assessing student mental health needs

Needs Assessment Pre-Planning Activity   
Let’s put these best practices into action! You will now have the opportunity to conduct a mental
health needs assessment using the questions provided below. This will allow you to apply your
knowledge and skills in evaluating student mental health needs and strengths.
Review and answer the following questions as a guide
for conducting a mental health needs and strengths
assessment in your school. 
IMAGE HERE
Questions to complete conducting a needs assessment activity
It is important to note that these questions should be used as a guide and can be adapted based
on the speciﬁc context and needs of the students being assessed.  

Sunsetting Programs That Are Not Working
There may be times when assessment data reveal that existing programs or interventions are
ineffective or no longer working. This could be due to several reasons. For example, they may
not align with the speciﬁc needs of students, suffer from a lack of necessary resources, be
inﬂuenced by changing circumstances, rely on outdated strategies or approaches, lack ongoing
evaluation and monitoring, or lack stakeholder engagement. When assessment data reveal that
a program or intervention is ineffective, a thorough evaluation is necessary to identify the
reasons behind its ineffectiveness. This evaluation process can provide valuable insights for
making informed decisions about program adjustments, redesign, or the need for alternative
interventions that better meet the evolving needs of the students. 
In situations like these, review:
the evidence base for the program or intervention
staff buy-in and ﬁdelity with which it is delivered
the match (or mismatch) to your student or school needs
If any of these elements is missing or cannot be addressed, you should consider sunsetting (or
exiting) the program or intervention used in your school.
See a strategic abandonment assessment tool below (developed by the Ector County
Independent School District) to reﬂect on additional considerations for sunsetting a program
or intervention.

Let's review the lesson.
- In the school setting, there are numerous resources available to support mental
health, including school counselors, psychologists, mental health clinics, peer
support programs, crisis intervention teams, mental health awareness programs,
community partnerships, online resources, support groups, and initiatives
involving parents/guardians. 
- Resource mapping is the process of identifying resources. It is important as it
improves communication, collaboration, problem-solving, and access to the most
helpful programs and services, avoids duplicating services, minimizes confusion
and stress for service users, and helps maintain records of program or service
usage and outcomes. 
- The needs assessment process involves data collection and analysis to identify
prevalent mental health issues, risk factors, and protective factors. 
Needs assessment provides valuable insights into the needs and strengths of
students, enabling targeted interventions and support systems.

*****
Core MTSS Practices-1.3
This course is designed to provide educators and school professionals with a
comprehensive understanding of core MTSS and integration of school mental
health practices while emphasizing the importance of developing cultural
competence, cultural humility, and fostering strong community and family
partnerships. These practices are a necessary part of creating an inclusive and
supportive learning environment that meets the diverse needs of all students.  
Get ready to embark on a transformative journey that will empower you to build a
more equitable and effective educational experience for your students and their
families. 
Data-informed Decision Making
Screening for Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Functioning

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Data-informed Decision Making
Outcomes:
1. Recognize the ways data is used to inform decisions in schools
2. Identify available data sources and reﬂect on their value and uses
3. Describe the process of progress monitoring using data
4. Apply data-informed decision making to each tier of MTSS
Data-informed Decision Making 
Taking Advantage of Data
Data sources on table
There is a great deal of data available for teachers, schools, and districts. Think about it! You
have grades, end of the year percentages, results from screeners, offce discipline, referrals—
and that’s not all! A large volume of data may be overwhelming, though, especially when trying
to make decisions.
It is common to feel lost about when to use data, which data to use, and how to make data-
informed decisions. 
In this lesson, the goal is to demystify data-informed decision making processes using the
MTSS framework.

What is Data-informed Decision Making?
Data-informed decision making is the process of using data to understand and meet needs. This
means analyzing the various sources of data that are available, looking for patterns, identifying
problems, and using this enhanced understanding to decide on what next steps will be most
beneﬁcial.  
Data can sound intimidating – however, data is just information. Decisions are made based on
data all the time in everyday life, even if you may not realize it. You may make a data-informed
decision when you: 
- Leave work at 6 PM because when you left at 5 PM yesterday, traffc made it take
twice as long to get home
- Eat at the restaurant that has a 5-star average review on Yelp instead of the
restaurant that has a 2-star average
- Purchase a car that has a higher miles-per-gallon rating to save money on gas
As you can see, data-informed decisions happen around
us all the time. Let's look at what this looks like in the
school setting.
Data collection is the ﬁrst step toward data-informed decision making. School systems
collect and maintain data for administrative, accountability, instructional, and support
service purposes.
Decisions that are informed by data in a structured and transparent process are more likely
to be effective, equitable, and effcient in supporting high quality student outcomes than are
other types of decision making.
Data-informed decision making processes can take a lot of time and thought, especially in
the early stages of data use. Persistence will pay off when you begin to see signiﬁcant positive
impacts on students’ academic, mental health, and overall wellbeing!
In MTSS, data is not about adding more to your plate. Instead, it is about ensuring that
you have the right nutrients on your plate when you need them.

Why Make Data-informed Decisions?
Now that we have more information about what data-informed decision making is, let's look at
how it is useful in the school setting. Let's start by reviewing this video about why data is so
important in the school setting. 
Why is data and data-based decision making such a critical part of……
Why is data and data-based decision making such a critical part of
As Dr. Little described in the video, data is a powerful tool used by teachers and other school
staff to identify student needs. Research demonstrates that data-informed decision making is
effective in improving student outcomes (Faria et al., 2017). 
Review the chart below for information on some of the
beneffts of data-informed decision making. 
- Providing information on student strengths –
Often, data is associated with looking for weaknesses or problems in the student population.
However, it is not just important to use data to identify students in need of support, but also to
learn about the unique strengths that students possess. 
- Reducing biases or inequities –
Using data to make decisions can provide objective measures to reduce any bias or inequity that
may exist. Data can also be used to determine when inequity is present.
- Making instructional time more efffcient –
Data can help teachers determine areas of strength and weakness in their classes and determine
which instructional methods may or may not be working for a particular group of students. This
can help them customize instruction as needed, adapting to the needs indicated by data.
- Increasing effectiveness of interventions –
Data can improve the effectiveness of interventions by ensuring that students are matched
appropriately and by measuring how well the intervention is going. With this knowledge,
practitioners can make decisions that increase their effectiveness and improve student
outcomes. 
- Providing students with the right fft when needed –
Ultimately, the goal of data-informed decision making is to ensure that students receive the right
support at the right time in order to meet their unique needs. Data gives us the information
needed to make these decisions.
What's my role?
Now that we know the power of data-informed
decisions, take a moment to consider how you
are (or could be) making these decisions in your
role.
There are many ways that you may participate in your school's process of data-informed
decision making. Here's a short list to get you started, but there are many, many others: 
- Use the scores from a pre-test given to your class to determine what to cover in the
next unit
- Use attendance records to determine which students in class are at-risk for falling
behind or dropping out
- Interpret universal screening results on an MTSS team
- Use progress monitoring to determine how an intervention is going
- Use behavior data (number of detentions, offce referrals, etc.) to determine if
students are in need of Tier 2 or Tier 3 support
- Keep going with this lesson for more examples and more information on this process!




Getting Started with Data-Informed Decision
Making
The First Step
The ffrst step in making decisions based on data is
ffnding data. Let's review some common sources of data
that you may have access to. 
Academic Assesments: Assessment data include universal screeners (e.g., Kindergarten
Readiness Assessment and reading screeners), progress monitoring
data, curriculum-based assessments, as well as grades and
daily assignments. 
Behavioral data: Behavioral data can come from behavioral assessments or
administrative sources such as offfce discipline referrals and visits
to the counselor, social worker, or nurse.
Attendance Records: Attendance data may be useful
in detecting barriers to student learning and success.
School Surveys: Survey data may be collected and available about students'
perceptions of the school climate, safety, and other topics
Community data: Community data include demographic characteristics such
as racial and ethnic composition, and community challenges such as
poverty, violent crime rates, prevalence of substance use
disorders, calls to crisis centers, and hospital visits
Social and emotional data: Social and Data from social, emotional, and
behavioral surveys and screeners are helpful for understanding
student risks and skills. More specialized mental health and
trauma screener data may be used as well.
These data sources may seem overwhelming. They can
also be broken down into categories: academic,
behavioral, and social-emotional. Review the graphic
below for examples.
IMAGE HERE
Graphic demonstrating different sources of data
With all of the information available, it's also important
to know what resources are available for collecting and
storing data. Below are examples of data collection and
interpretation structures. Click for more information.
Think about which of these you have access to and use in
your work.
Apps: Software for specific or special types of data analysis, reports, and communications
Spreadsheet Templates: Computer spreadsheet software for data entry set up to automatically make calculations or analyze data
Time: Protected time for data collection, analysis, and interpretation
Team Meetings: A space and time to interpret data
Community/Family Nights: A space and time to collect and/or interpret data
Social Media: Communication tool for collecting some types of data and sharing results
PowerSchool: Software to enter, retrieve, and analyze data
Shared Drives: Cloud drives or hard drives multiple team members can access
Take-home Folders: A system for sending home and bringing back data such as surveys

Review data sources used in schools in the table below.
Reffect on the types of data you use, frequency of use,
and key strengths and limitations. Click the table to
enlarge. 
TABLE HERE
Table indicating sources of data




Utilizing Data: Progress Monitoring
Making Informed Decisions
Sources of data have been identiﬁed, so what's next? Let's review how to make the best use of
our data through progress monitoring. 
Progress monitoring is the process of setting goals and measuring their progress over time.
Progress monitoring can be used to support any type of academic, behavioral, or social-
emotional goals. There are three phases of progress monitoring that we will examine here.
Review the list below.
1. Goal setting
2. Visualizing progress
3. Measuring ﬁdelity

1. Goal Setting:
The ﬁrst step when monitoring progress is to determine what we are looking for. Using
baseline assessments can help inform what goals you want to set for your students and
determine what target outcome is being worked towards. 
No matter the target outcome, the team should take care to develop student goals that are
speciﬁc, measurable, and realistic for the student. You may have heard of SMARTIE goals. This
goal development technique has been applied to many behaviors, from workplace productivity
to ﬁtness to education. Using SMARTIE goals can help us be systematic with goal development
and, in turn, progress monitoring. 
Specific –
Your goal should be speciﬁc. Deﬁne the goal you are measuring in a clear, concise way. When
goals are related to behavior, use language that refers to the observable characteristics of the
behavior. For example, instead of setting the goal that “Julia will be less hyperactive,” be speciﬁc
about the behaviors Julia exhibits, such as tapping her pencil, getting out of her seat, and
wandering around the classroom. When forming a goal, also include any relevant information,
such as setting or time of day. A speciﬁc goal may be something like, "Julia will reduce her
pencil-tapping behavior in her classes." 
Measurable –
Be sure that you can measure the target behavior! This can get tricky with some internalizing
issues, like depression. One option is measuring symptoms with a standardized rating scale. You
could use something speciﬁc, like the Children's Depression Inventory (CDI), or a general rating
scale, like the Behavior Assessment System for Children (BASC-3). To continue our example with
Julia, we can measure the frequency with which she taps her pencil. We could add to our goal:
"Julia will reduce the amount of pencil-tapping behavior from 10 to 2 times per class." 
Achievable –
Goals should be challenging but attainable for students. We always want to set them up for
success. Goals can always be increased or adjusted if they are met quickly. This is a good problem
to have! 
Realistic –
Here, consider what is a reasonable amount of change for your time frame. Behavior issues are
rarely resolved quickly. Think progress over perfection. Maybe a student with social anxiety sat
on the edge of the carpet during her 3rd grade class's morning meeting. This could be an
improvement from sitting at her desk, away from the group. 
Timely –
Identify the time frame for achieving the goal. Include not only the projected achievement date,
but also how often progress will be monitored and by whom. Being clear about these details can
be helpful for intervention implementation, ﬁdelity, and timely data collection. For example, we
can set a speciﬁc timeline: "Julia will reduce her pencil-tapping behavior from 10 to 2 times per
science class by the end of this month." 
Inclusive –
When setting goals, think about inclusivity, or how we can bring marginalized people into our
decision making and procedure development. Consider not only your students, families, and
school staff, but the community at large.
Equitable –
Lastly, think about the fairness of your goal. What are some ways to incorporate restoration and
justice?

Review the flashcards below for some example goals you
may work with students to achieve. 
Attendance:Reduce number of absences, Reduce number of tardies or
early dismissals,Increase overall amount of time at school each day
Behavior: Reduce the amount of time between teacher's
instructions and when the child begins their work, Increase the amount of on-
task behavior during whole group instruction, Increase the amount of on-
task behavior
Anxiety: Increase school attendance, Increase use of calming
strategies during high-stress situations, Increase positive social
interactions with peers, Decrease escape behaviors (leaving the classroom)

Gathering Additional Information
To support these goals, you may need to gather additional information. Using anxiety as an
example, the team would likely need to gather additional information on what appears to trigger
anxiety at school. Are there certain times of day, settings, or other factors that seem related to
their experience of anxiety? How does anxiety look for this student? These are all important
questions to consider so the team can select an intervention that meets their needs. 
Using attendance as an example, we would likely need to support the entire family rather than
just the child. In addition, intervention for attendance would likely look different for an
elementary school child than a high school student who might drive themselves to school.

Visualizing Progress
After goals are set, the next step is to determine if the goal is being met and if progress is being
made. An effcient and practical way to detect district, school, group, or student progress is to
graph the data using a bar or line graph. This can show progress over time and be compared to
an intended goal line. Visuals help you quickly determine if you are meeting, exceeding, or
falling behind on goals.  
One way to describe students' progress is by using 3 categories: suffcient growth, uncertain
growth, and insuffcient growth. Let's take a look at what these categories mean.
Sufffcient Growth –
The graph in the picture demonstrates suffcient growth, meaning that the student is exceeding
their goal!
The student line (blue) is steeper and greater than the goal line (green). Steeper lines show that
desired growth has been achieved while participating in that intervention. 
In general, a student line should be a few (2 or 3) data points above the goal line to show that the
student has demonstrated consistently improved performance. This may be a good time to
reduce the intensity and frequency of support.
Uncertain Growth –
The graph in the picture demonstrates uncertain growth. 
The student line (blue) is wavering around the goal line (green). This may mean that you need to
take a closer look at the intervention/practices. 
At this point, check the frequency, ﬁdelity (the extent to which it is delivered as intended), and
intensity of the intervention. If the intervention is to meet with the school counselor weekly, it
could be that the student is missing these meetings—suggesting that the student is not actually
receiving treatment. 
You could also compare this student’s data to another student who is also receiving the same
treatment. If the other student is showing growth, the intervention may not work for this particular student.
Insufffcient Growth –
The graph in the picture demonstrates insuffcient growth. In this case, the student is still
improving; however, they are not growing at the rate that is hoped for. 
The student line (blue) is below the goal line (green). This may mean that the
intervention/practice is not working, and another intervention should be tried for the student. 
The next step is similar to uncertain growth. First, check if the intervention is being delivered
with ﬁdelity. If the intervention is delivered as intended, then it is now time to connect with the
MTSS team to review the student's data and develop a new support plan. 
For the new support plan, we recommend the following adjustments: 
- a focus on a different and/or more foundational skill 
- a change in the intervention strategy or program 
- a change in the time of the intervention sessions 
- a change in the interventionist 
- an increase in the intervention frequency 
Note: While these graphs indicate increases in desired outcomes, some graphs indicate
decreasing outcomes. For example, a student's goal may be to reduce offfce discipline
referrals each month. In these cases, the student line is still compared to the goal line;
however, it is hoped that the student is at or below the goal line instead of at or above the
goal line. Setting goals before progress monitoring lets you know exactly what to look for
in these graphs.

What do we do with this information?
If students are achieving suffcient growth, then that's great! Interventions can continue as
needed, and then decisions can be made to reduce interventions as ﬁt. However, if the team
reviews data and the student is not improving, there are several options. The team might decide
to discontinue or scale back the current intervention. Reviewing the data, the team might learn
that there are other prerequisite skills the student needs to work on rather than the original
target. For instance, if a student is not yet ready to participate in whole group instruction, the
team may decide to help the student build skills to remain in or near the group during
instruction. Alternatively, the team may ﬁnd another intervention that could be more effective
and decide to implement that instead.   
For more tips on progress monitoring for clinicians, we
hear from Dr. Ashley Greenwald, Director of the Nevada
PBIS Technical Assistance Center, in the video below.
As mentioned in the video, some goals may be challenging to monitor progress for, especially if
you are working on social or emotional goals that may not have as much observable data. For
students in small groups or individual interventions, clinicians' notes are a valuable source of
data. Don't forget to gather data on students' thoughts and feelings that are not as easily
observable!

Measuring Fidelity
When we hear progress monitoring, we tend to think of measuring students' progress. After all,
we are gathering data on students every day! We should also gather information to determine if
we are implementing programs, practices, and services as they were developed. You may have
heard of this referred to as intervention ﬁdelity. Before we can have conﬁdence in the
effectiveness (or ineffectiveness) of a program or practice, we need to be conﬁdent about
ﬁdelity to that practice.
How do we measure intervention ffdelity?
This depends. If your intervention should include 3 sessions per week, and there are only one or
two sessions a week, there is clearly a problem with ﬁdelity. Keeping logs of sessions and
student attendance is one simple way to quickly check this type of ﬁdelity. If you're using a
manualized intervention, you would want to review your sessions to make sure you are
following all of the included steps. Some programs come with checklists. If not, making a
checklist for yourself can be helpful. Whatever interventions your school or district chooses,
there should be regular ﬁdelity checks. Your team can problem solve barriers to ﬁdelity early on
for the best results.
Brief measures can also be collected from families, teachers, and students. For Tier 3 services,
the Patient-Centered Outcomes Management System (PCOMS) is a brief measure that gathers
feedback from therapy clients and can identify issues or barriers to treatment success. You can
also use more informal measures, like quick electronic forms, to get a sense of how students,
families, and teachers think an intervention is going.
The Center on Multi-tiered System of Supports at the
American Institutes for Research (AIR) has additional
progress monitoring resources, including comparisons of
academic and behavioral screening tools and how teams
can use data to guide decision making. Click on the link
below to learn more!

Progress Monitoring
At the student level, progress monitoring is used to assess students'
performance, to quantify a student's rate of improvement or responsiveness to
instruction or intervention, and to evaluate the effectiveness of instruction
using valid and reliable measures. In addition, across all levels of the system
sites monitor progress to provide feedback for improvement.



Data-informed Decision Making and MTSS
IMAGE HERE
Connecting Principles to Systems
A graphic illustrating the components of data-informed decision making (adapted
from the Center on Multi-Tiered System of Supports)
The graphic above shows the three main components of data-informed decision making:
progress monitoring, screening, and a multi-level prevention system (like MTSS). As a practice,
data-informed decision making is a core element of MTSS and occurs across all three tiers. It is
central to identifying needs, connecting to appropriate services and instruction, and
monitoring progress toward goals.
MTSS is most effective when many types of data are examined collectively. This means looking
at academic, social, emotional, behavioral, administrative, and other survey data together to see
a more complete picture of your students, staff, school, and district. In this way, MTSS supports
all students as a whole. Let's review what this might look like at each tier of the system.

Tier 1
Universal (Tier 1) data is reviewed to support an entire school, classroom, or grade level. Class-
wide data, for example, helps teachers determine what types of instruction to offer all students.
Within the classroom, teachers may also struggle with students’ behavior, and universal
behavior supports such as schedules and routines may signiﬁcantly reduce the frequency and
intensity of challenging behaviors. Staff who review Tier 1 data with teachers can support them
with resources and strategies (e.g., coaching, professional development) to meet student
needs. 
In general, teams review Tier 1 data monthly to monitor the impact and effectiveness of Tier 1
evidence-based practices. Teams make adjustments if challenges are still present for most
students. If a Tier 1 practice or program is changed, looking at data before and after that change
is a great way to evaluate the success of that program or strategy. Always keep in mind ﬁdelity—
the extent to which a practice or program is being delivered as intended. If there are barriers to
program or practice ﬁdelity, these barriers must be addressed or another program or practice
selected.
If many or most students seem to need supplemental (Tier 2) support, it is likely introducing or
bolstering a high quality universal (Tier 1) program or practice will be enough to reduce
challenges and meet needs. Examining universal data early in the year and two additional times
during the school year and implementing high quality Tier 1 programming can prevent many
challenges for teachers, staff, and students.

Tier 2
Even when the evidence-based practices and programs are delivered with ﬁdelity and a high
degree of quality, there will still be some students who need additional support—this is when
supplemental (Tier 2) supports should be used. 
With Tier 1 practices in place, school teams should draft decision rules for identifying students
for supplemental (Tier 2) support. Data used as part of the identiﬁcation process may include: 
- Offce discipline referrals
- Suspensions
- Classroom minor behavior challenges
- Instructional time lost
- Academic performance
- Attendance and/or tardiness
The nature of the Tier 2 support should be matched with students' needs.
When developing intervention plans at Tier 2, it is essential to work with students’ strengths to
successfully meet needs.
For example, you may see from data that John is disturbing others and having diffculty
completing tasks. John also scored high on positive relationships. John may be able to
adapt/change his behaviors in the classroom with an approach where he is able to learn from
his peers, such as group work. 
Some districts use programs that aggregate student data and ffag students at risk for
academic or behavioral problems. These programs can give a helpful overview of the
student population of a school or district; at times, further examination of data or
information gathering may be required to understand the scope or depth of a student’s
issues. While these programs can be a useful resource, they do not take the place of
regular data reviews by the MTSS team.

Tier 3
With Tier 1 and Tier 2 support in place, a few students will continue to need more intensive
intervention—this is the Tier 3 intervention or intensive intervention. 
To identify if a student needs Tier 3 support, plan to look at multiple data points for individuals
(multiple points in time and multiple types of data). Tier 3 often requires an intensive data
review before making any decisions about intended interventions or evidence-based practices.
This intensive review is generally conducted by an interventionist or data team (NCII, 2013). 
Students who are referred or identiﬁed for Tier 3 support usually have already been provided
Tier 2 support. As with Tier 1 supports, consider if Tier 2 supports were delivered with ﬁdelity
and were a good match for the student's needs.
For Tier 3 support services, family input and involvement should be sought. Tier 3 services
should be multimodal, meaning that a therapist or interventionist would be providing
intervention, and classroom teachers (or others) would be providing additional supports across
the student's many environments. 
Make sure to let your students know that they can keep in contact with you even when
they move back to Tier 1! This may look like dropping by in the morning to say hello on
the way to class, or occasionally having lunch together at school.

Key Ways to Leverage Data Across All Tiers
Now that you have learned about data-informed
decision making at each tier, let's summarize some best
practices across all tiers! Click through the graphic
below.
Focus on different sources of data:
Validate your concerns with multiple sources of data. For example, examine attendance, discipline, and
depression screening data together.
Focus on the student as a whole:
Understand students' behavioral, social-emotional, and academic struggles and strengths in providing
the right support.
Let the data speak for itself:
Don't frame decisions based on assumptions and predictions. Comprehensively examine the data to guide
decisions. Look for or collect more data if you do not think you have enough information.
Understand the data:
Have a data code book that explains what each assessment measures. This way, others who are handling
the data are better equipped to make impactful decisions.
Know your students:
Knowing your students and understanding their experiences will help you better understand the reasons
behind a challenging behavior.
Analyze needs and strengths:
Observe the needs AND celebrate the successes and strengths!
Examine the underlying problem:
Do not rely only on students' symptoms for information. Work with your team to better understand what
is causing the problem. Generate multiple explanations and use data to guide you to the most likely cause.
Analyze data equitably:
Examine data by age, race, ethnicity, and other factors to make sure you fully address the needs of ALL
students.

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- Data is an extremely valuable tool in making decisions. Data is advantageous
because it can help make decisions less biased or inequitable, increase effciency of
classroom instruction/interventions, and identify both strengths and needs of
students. 
- Too much data can be exhausting and time consuming. Select and organize your
data sources to help make it more manageable. Some common data sources include
attendance and behavior records, academic assessments, grades, and test scores.
- Data is used to identify speciﬁc needs, connect to appropriate supports, and
monitor progress. The three main phases of progress monitoring include goal-
setting, visualizing progress, and measuring ﬁdelity. 
- Data-informed decisions are made across all three tiers of support to connect
students to support and make decisions about best practices. 
Screening for Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Functioning



@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Screening for Social, Emotional, and Behavioral
Functioning
Outcomes:
1. Deﬁne and describe the importance of universal social, emotional, and behavioral
screening
2. Assess the process of implementing screening in the school setting
3. Consider examples of social, emotional, and behavioral screening tools


Universal Screening
Enhancing Awareness
You’ve heard universal screening mentioned through the previous lessons, but you may not be
as familiar with it as you want to be. Don’t worry! We’re going to go over it in much more detail
here. 
Universal screening is a systematic process of administering assessments to all students in a
school to identify students who may be at risk for certain negative outcomes or are in need of
additional support. This process is important because it identiﬁes concerns proactively and
helps students connect early with interventions and supports. For example, you may be familiar
with:
- Periodic Vision and Hearing Screening: All students are screened for vision and
hearing problems before entering school because of the impact of hearing and
vision problems on educational and social/emotional outcomes. When students are
identiﬁed through this process, they can be connected to vision and hearing
specialists for further testing and support. 
- Literacy Screening: Act 213 (provides direction on the implementation of South
Carolina MTSS and the use of approved screeners) requires that districts must
screen all kindergarten and 1st-grade students to determine their risk level in
reading. Like vision and hearing screening, the results of this can also help connect
students in need of additional support to literacy specialists and interventions.
- Kindergarten Readiness: South Carolina Code § 59-155-150 requires that students
entering publicly funded prekindergarten and kindergarten must be administered a
readiness assessment by the 45th day of the school year. 
- Other Academic Screening: There are other academic screening assessments, such
as MAP and CogAT. These assessments are used to identify learning needs and
customize instruction, such as identifying students for gifted and talented
programs.
Let's take a moment to watch this short video and
review the basics of universal screening in schools.
The Basics of Universal Screening
The Basics of Universal Screening
Let's recap what was in this video: 
- Screening is preventative and proactive: identifying student needs early can help students
connect to support before problems become larger 
- Screening can be applied to reading, math, and social-emotional-behavioral skills
In this lesson, we will focus on social-emotional-behavioral (SEB) screening. 
 “Awareness is the greatest agent for change.”   
- Eckhart Tolle, teacher and self-help author


What is Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Health Screening? 
The three critical and interrelated components of mental health are social - how we relate to
others, emotional - how we feel, and behavioral - how we act (Chafouleas, 2020). Universal
screening applied to social, emotional, and behavioral functioning can help identify students
with an elevated risk of having or developing a mental health disorder (e.g., Dvorsky et al., 2014).
Importantly, screening does not diagnose mental health disorders. Its purpose is to identify
students who may be at risk in order to provide further testing or connect to supports as
needed.  
To learn more about social-emotional-behavioral
screening, review the video featuring Kathleen Lane
below. 
Let's do a quick review of some of the main points of the above video:
Screening can indicate internalizing and externalizing concerns – internalizing concerns
can be more challenging to identify because of the lack of external behaviors that teachers
or other adults notice, so screening is important for catching these students
Screening happens in the fall (after school has started), winter, and spring
Screening can help identify which tier of support is needed for students: it could indicate
problems that may need to be addressed at the Tier 1 level, or indicate students or groups in
need of Tier 2 or Tier 3 intervention services 
Screening can help identify student strengths as well as needs

Screening Measures
Let’s review a little more about what SEB screening tools measure. As mentioned in the video,
SEB screening can indicate that some students may be at higher risk for developing mental
health disorders. These might be internalizing or externalizing. Let’s look at the difference
between the two.
IMAGE HERE
Again, screening tools do not diagnose disorders. However, they can ﬂag students for further
testing and connect to support before concerns may become a disorder.  
Beyond this, we also know that good mental health is not simply the absence of risk, but the
possession of skills necessary to cope with transitions, changes, and everyday challenges.
Because mental health is not just the absence of risk, screening tools might also address
general social-emotional-behavioral competencies. Some of the skills they might test for
include: 
Self-Awareness:
Self-awareness involves understanding one's own emotions, personal goals, and values.
This includes accurately assessing one's strengths and limitations, having a positive
mindset, and possessing a well-grounded sense of self-effcacy and optimism. High levels
of self-awareness require the ability to recognize how thoughts, feelings, and actions are
interconnected.
Self-Management:
Self-management requires skills and attitudes that facilitate the ability to regulate one's own
emotions and behaviors. This includes the ability to delay gratiﬁcation, manage stress,
control impulses, and persevere through challenges in order to achieve personal and
educational goals.
Social Awareness:
Social awareness involves the ability to understand, empathize, and feel compassion for
those with different backgrounds or cultures. It also involves understanding social norms
for behavior and recognizing family, school, and community resources and supports.
Relationship Skills:
Relationship skills help students establish and maintain healthy and rewarding
relationships, and to act in accordance with social norms. These skills involve
communicating clearly, listening actively, cooperating, resisting inappropriate social
pressure, negotiating conﬂict constructively, and seeking help when it is needed.
Responsible Decision Making:
Responsible decision making involves learning how to make constructive choices about
personal behavior and social interactions across diverse settings. It requires the ability to
consider ethical standards, safety concerns, accurate behavioral norms for risky behaviors,
the health and wellbeing of self and others, and to make realistic evaluations of various
consequences of actions. 
Different screening tools will measure social, emotional, and behavioral health differently and
may focus on different aspects of the areas mentioned above. We will review some example
screening tools later in this lesson, so stay tuned for more information!

Why is Universal SEB Screening Important?
The U.S. Department of Education recognizes that universal screening is a critical ﬁrst step in
identifying students who are at risk for experiencing diffculties that threaten to impede the
learning process and impact their mental health and wellbeing. One of the key action steps
recommended is to use screening tools. In this section, let's examine why these screening tools
are so important.
Screening is extremely useful in the quest for overall student wellbeing. Screening can promote
social and emotional development for all students in classrooms by identifying those students
struggling with mental health challenges that impact their full access to and participation in
learning. SEB screenings in schools allow staff to:
- Proactively identify a signiﬁcant percentage of students that may be at risk for
social- emotional problems or mental illnesses
- Identify more details about those currently experiencing a range of mental health
concerns
- Identify those experiencing diffculties that have, thus far, gone undetected
- Decide when students may need additional services beyond Tier 1 (universal) into 
 Tier 2 (targeted) support and Tier 3 (intensive) support
- Determine if any school-wide trends are present that may need to be addressed at
the Tier 1 level
This early identiﬁcation of mental health concerns is extremely important. As you learned in
"All Hands on Deck," mental health challenges are a concern for many students: 1 in 6 children
is diagnosed with a mental health condition. In addition, approximately 50% of lifetime mental
health conditions begin by age 14 and 75% begin by age 24. At the same time, the average delay
between when symptoms ﬁrst appear and intervention is approximately 11 years (National
Alliance on Mental Illness, 2023).
When left untreated or undertreated, coping with the pain of mental illness can also contribute
to self-harm and thoughts of suicide, which is one of the leading causes of death for young
people ages 10-24 (Centers for Disease Control, 2020).  
Universal social, emotional, and behavioral health screenings in school allow for early
identiﬁcation, prevention, and connecting students with needed mental health services and
interventions. Here are some reasons why universal screening assessments are especially
helpful for identifying students who are at risk for developing mental illnesses: 
1. Youth do not generally seek help on their own. Young people are reluctant to seek
help for mental health problems (Chan & Quinn, 2012; Yap, et al., 2013) due to
stigma and/or inability to recognize there is a problem.
2. Adults are not always able to correctly identify youth who experience mental health
issues by observation only. It is often diffcult to correctly recognize mental health
issues in young people. Adults may not know what signs to look for and may not
understand how to encourage young people to seek help.
3. Reliable screening instruments are widely available. Schools and staff have access
to a full range of valid evidence-based screening instruments.
4. Help is available. Schools have access to programs offered by staff within the
schools along with external community partners who come to schools to offer
supports.

“Students come to school each day with more than their lunch and
backpack. They bring life factors that shape their learning and
development. These inffuences range from family issues, health
concerns, and culture...to behavior, learning proffles, and
abilities...all have the potential to impact the mental health of
students.” 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)
Knowledge Check




Implementing Universal SEB Screening
Applying the Strategy
Now that we have more information on what universal SEB screening is, let's examine what this
looks like when being implemented in the school setting. 
Based on a review of approximately 35 publications on school‐based mental health screening,
mental health screening within an MTSS framework is occurring nationally in all grade levels
(National Center for School Mental Health, 2015). In fact, a recent internal survey conducted by
the School Superintendents Association indicated that “students’ behavioral health needs”
were the top concern of superintendents across the country (Jackson, 2018).
However, even though universal behavioral health screening in schools has been proven
effective, adoption of screening practices has been limited. Many schools continue to rely on
offce discipline referrals as a primary source for the identiﬁcation of students needing support.
Data from multiple studies indicate that, at most, only 20% of schools currently engage in
mental health screening (Herman et al.,2020). Review the list below for some common barriers
to implementing SEB screening. 
Awareness –
One barrier to implementing SEB screening may be that not all educators are aware that such
screening practices exist or may not know how to use them (Bruhn et al., 2014). 
Limited support –
Schools may be hesitant to implement SEB screenings because of a concern that it will identify a
larger number of youth in need of intervention than can readily and feasibly be served by a school
(Dever et al., 2012).
Time –
Many schools may have a substantial number of required screenings already in place, and adding
SEB screening may be a concern for time and resources. 
Community responses –
Educators may be concerned about negative reactions or hesitation from students' parents and
caregivers (Bruhn et al., 2014).
Limited training –
Educators may not have received enough guidance and training around how to carry out
screenings (Moffa et al., 2018). 

Planning for Implementation
Having a plan for screening can help address some of these concerns and break down some of
these barriers. Careful planning and preparation are key. To be initiated successfully, issues
related to the following factors must be addressed:
- Obtaining district, staff, student, and family cooperation: involved stakeholders should
consider the screener to be acceptable and useful   
- It must be practical to universally administer the screener within the desired context. This
includes clear instructions and examples to explain any diffcult concepts. 
- Allocating resources (ﬁscal and staffng) to support the screening process
	Training and professional development regarding screening (administration, data
	analyses, decision making, intervention selection, and rules related to decisions)  
	Deﬁning roles and responsibilities of all staff involved in the screening process 
- Addressing ethical, legal, and liability considerations (e.g., parental consent and student
assent; communication; conﬁdentiality) 
- Developing and expanding data systems 
- Identifying and coordinating resources necessary to support students in need of additional
intervention 
- Time
	Consider the amount of time needed to collect, store, enter, manage and analyze
	screener data, in addition to time for administration
	An additional consideration is time that personnel will need to train staff in the
	administration and completion of the screening process


Selecting Screening Tools
Once an initial plan for screening is in place, schools and districts can begin selecting the
screeners that are most appropriate for their needs. A wide variety of evidence-based screening
instruments have been developed and are available for use in schools, with each tool having its
own strengths and weaknesses. In this section of the lesson, we will discuss what to look for in
a screening tool. Overall, primary considerations should be whether the evidence-based
instrument provides the appropriate information that the school desires and whether the
instrument is a "good ﬁt” for the school. 
For more information determining if screening tools are
a good fft for your school, review the video below from
the Comprehensive Integrated Three-Tiered Model of
Prevention, featuring Dr. Kathleen Lane. 
Concluding Thoughts on Screening
Concluding Thoughts on Screening
To summarize Dr. Lane's main points: 
- The question is not if you screen, but which tool to use 
- There are four recommendations for implementing screening effectively:  
	Build expertise – know how to use screening tools and provide training for anyone
	administering them
	Develop structures for improving practices 
	Conduct screening responsibly - apply research, use Technical Assistance centers,
	and seek input and feedback
	Consider legal implications – know state laws 
- Some questions to consider when you are selecting screeners are: age/grade level, who
completes the screener, types of concerns assessed, cost, time, is intervention included?
- Have a plan – know what you are going to do with screening data, and be careful not to
overwhelm the system
- The best screening tool is the one that best meets the needs of your individual school
Let's examine two of these points in more detail: 1) using screening responsibly, and 2)
matching screeners to needs.

Using Screeners Responsibly
As mentioned in the video, it is important to use tools that are backed by research and have
evidence for their effectiveness. Validity, reliability, classiﬁcation accuracy, statistical bias, and
sample representativeness are all important indicators of the effectiveness of a screening tool.
Review the ﬂashcards below to learn more about what these terms mean.
Validity: Validity refers to how well the measure indicates what it intends
to. For example: does the screener accurately identify students who
have behavioral challenges?
Reliability: Reliability is an indicator of the consistency of the measure. For
example, does the screener show the same results when repeated?
Classiffcation accuracy : Classiffcation accuracy refers to whether or not the measure is
accurate in its results, or if there are false negatives (identifying
students as not being at risk even though they are) or false positives
(identifying students as at-risk when they aren't).
Statistical bias: Statistical bias refers to how well the measure works for
different student groups. It is important for screening tools to work equally well across all
student groups, so if there is any disproportionality indicated by the screener, other
assessment tools may be needed or modifications may be needed. 
Sample representativeness: Sample representativeness refers to whether or not the measure is
used for the population that it was designed for. For example, a screening tool might be based on a
national sample or based on a speciffc state. 
The National Center on Intensive Intervention at the
American Institute of Research provides ffve one-page
documents with a brief overview of each of these areas.
Click on each of the "Go" buttons below for more
information. 
Validity
Reliability
Classiffcation Accuracy
Statistical Bias
Sample Representativeness

Matching Screeners to Needs
Once tools that are evidence-based have been identiﬁed, the next step is to determine which of
these tools will work best for your speciﬁc school or district. One question to ask to help
determine the right ﬁt for a screening tool is what purpose the screening is intended to have in
the school. While the general purpose of universal screening is well-deﬁned, school teams need
to come to a consensus about the purpose of screening in their school building. Having a clear
purpose can help teams reach their desired outcomes. 
Review the image below for a list of questions to ask about the purpose of a screening tool. Click
to enlarge. 
IMAGE HERE
Graphic of four questions to determine the purpose of a screening tool
Once the purpose of screening has been identiﬁed, it is also important to consider the usability
and feasibility of the measure as well as its contextual appropriateness. Review the cards below
for more information about these aspects of screening tools.

Usability and Feasibility:
Usability and feasibility are important considerations in determining ﬁt. Some questions to
ask include: 
	-Can the data be collected, analyzed, interpreted, and used within the constraints of the
	educational environment?
	-Is the data accessible and understandable?

Contextual Appropriateness:
Different screening tools are designed for different groups of students. When selecting a
screening tool, it is important to consider the context that it was designed for. Questions to
ask about contextual appropriateness include:
	- What ages/grades is the measure intended for?
	- What language is the measure available in? Is it accessible for English Language
	Learners? 
	- Does the screening tool function similarly across different student subgroups?
	- What are the similarities and differences between your student population and the
	population used as the "norm" group (the group used to research and develop the
	screener you will be using)?
Answering these questions can ensure that the screening tool is the right ﬁt for your student
population.


The list below describes some common traits of strong
screening tools (O'Malley, 2020).
- Low cost
- Low time demand
- Psychometrically sound
- Assesses key domains and links to an MTSS Framework
- Easy to access, collect, and interpret data
While these traits are generally beneﬁcial in a screening tool, as mentioned earlier, the most
important aspect of selecting screening tools is that they are a good ﬁt for your speciﬁc
community. For more information about speciﬁc screening tools that are available and meet
these criteria, keep going with this lesson!




Survey of Screening Tools
What is Available?
Now that we know more about what screening tools are, why they are useful, and some
considerations for implementing them, let's review some examples of screening tools that are
currently available. There are many more screening tools than we will review here, so there are
many options!

The Systematic Screening for Behavior Disorders (SSBD)
The SSBD is an evidence-based screening system for identifying students who are at risk for
internalizing and externalizing problems. These two forms of behavioral problems can disrupt
social adjustment and impair academic success. SSBD provides the means to quickly identify
these students and enables school staff to implement early interventions and supports. Click the
play button to watch.


The Student Risk Screening Scale - Internalizing and
Externalizing (SRSS)
The SRSS-IE (Drummond, 1994; Lane & Menzies, 2009) is a universal screening tool used three
times per year to identify students who may be at risk for challenging, antisocial behavior. The
SRSS-IE is conducted to better inform instruction. It is not used to exclude students from the
instructional environment. Rather, it is used to select appropriate support for students. The
SRSS is not used independently to determine special education eligibility or make other high-
stakes decisions. The SRSS-IE, like all universal screening tools, is not used to label students.
The SRSS-IE is not intended as an assessment of traits or personality. It should be used as one
of multiple data sources to indicate student risk. 

Behavior Intervention Monitoring Assessment System
(BIMAS-2)
The Behavior Intervention Monitoring Assessment System (BIMAS-2™) is a measure of
behavioral functioning and social, emotional skills in children and adolescents ages pre-k to 18
years. 
The BIMAS 2- can:
- Identify children who are at risk with an early warning system
- Monitor the effectiveness of system-wide interventions like Positive Behavior Supports,
(PBS), or Social Emotional Learning, (SEL)
- Monitor small group or individual intervention plans
- Analyze common behavioral concerns and adaptive behavior
For more information, review the link below.

The Strengths and Difffculties Questionnaire
The Strengths and Diffculties Questionnaire (SDQ) is a brief, 25-item measure of behavioral
and emotional diffculties that can be used to assess mental health problems in children and
young people aged 4–17 years. The SDQ can capture the perspective of the child/young person
(self-report) or the observations of parents and teachers.
The SDQ can be used as a screening tool or to measure treatment outcomes, and it has been
extensively implemented across countries for research and clinical purposes. It is available in
over 40 different languages and can be used without charge for non-commercial purposes.
Review the link below for more information and downloads of multiple versions of the
assessment. 
A) 25 items on psychological attributes. All versions of the SDQ ask about 25
attributes, some positive and others negative.
READ MORE SDQINFO 

The Social, Academic, & Emotional Behavior Risk Screener (SAEBRS) 
The Social, Academic, & Emotional Behavior Risk Screener (SAEBRS) is a brief tool supported by
research for use in universal screening for behavioral and emotional risk. The measure falls
within a broad class of highly effcient tools and is suitable for teacher use in evaluating and
rating all students on common behavioral criteria (Severson, et al., 2007). The SAEBRS is
designed for use in the K-12 setting. It is grounded within a conceptual model, which states that
a student’s success in school is not only related to his or her academic achievement, but also to
success within multiple behavioral domains.
Follow the link below for more information. 

FastBridge SAEBRS
Social Behavior Domain (6 items) Students' ability to understand social norms,
empathize, and understand the perspectives of others. Academic Behavior
Domain (6 items) Skills necessary for students to be prepared for, participate
in, and beneﬁt from academic instruction. Emotional Behavior Domain (7
items) Students' ability to regulate internal states, adapt to change, and
respond to stressful/challenging events.

WCSD's Social and Emotional Competency Assessment 
The WCSD Social and Emotional Competency Assessment (SECA) is a set of instruments
developed through a collaboration between Washoe County School District in Nevada, the
Collaborative for Academic and Social Emotional Learning (CASEL), and the University of Illinois
at Chicago through an Institute of Education Sciences Research-Practitioner Partnership grant.
The project resulted in the development of two instruments and a bank of items aligned to the
CASEL 5 clusters and WCSD SEL standards. 
Long-Form Assessment: 40-item instrument measuring eight domains of social and emotional
competence: 
- self-awareness of strengths and weaknesses 
- self-awareness of emotions 
- self-management of emotions 
- self-management of goals
- self-management of schoolwork
- relationship skills 
- social awareness
- responsible decision-making
Short-Form Assessment: 17-item, short-form assessment of global social and emotional
competence.  
Item Bank: 138 items assessing eight domains. Useful for training and item replacement.

All three instruments are free and open-source. You and your organization can use and adapt the
instruments any way you would like. You do not need to request permission to use these
instruments, but it is appreciated if you would cite the measure to track how organizations use
the instruments, expand the knowledge base, and connect users together. The measure can be
cited as “items from or adapted from the WCSD Social and Emotional Competency Assessment
(Davidson et al., 2017).” Review the link below for more information.

School Climate / Social & Emotional Assessment
The Washoe County School District Social and Emotional Competency
Assessments (WCSD-SECAs) are free, open-source instruments that measure
the self-reported social and emotional competencies of students in grades 5-12.
The WCSD-SECA instruments were developed through a collaboration among
WCSD, the Collaborative for Academic and Social and Emotional Learning
(CASEL), and the University of Illinois at Chicago through an Institute of
Education Sciences Research-Practitioner Partnership grant.
READ MORE WASHOESCHOOLS 


Let's review the lesson.
- Universal screening is applied in the school setting for many different outcomes,
including social-emotional-behavioral health.
- The purpose of universal SEB screening is to identify students who may be at-risk
for SEB concerns, such as behavior disorders or mental illnesses.
- Universal SEB screening is proactive and preventative, identifying needs that may
have otherwise gone undetected.
- There are many considerations for implementing screening processes in your
school, including the evidence base for the screening tool, affordability, and
feasibility of implementation.
- High-quality screening tools are valid, reliable, and statistically sound.
- There are many screening tools available for use. Considering the needs and
resources of your school will impact which screeners are most appropriate for your
use. 
EXIT COURSE



*****
Core MTSS Practices-1.4
This course is designed to provide educators and school professionals with a
comprehensive understanding of core MTSS and integration of school mental
health practices while emphasizing the importance of developing cultural
competence, cultural humility, and fostering strong community and family
partnerships. These practices are a necessary part of creating an inclusive and
supportive learning environment that meets the diverse needs of all students.  
Get ready to embark on a transformative journey that will empower you to build a
more equitable and effective educational experience for your students and their
families. 
- Strengthening School-Family-Community Partnerships
- Cultural Competence in the School Setting


@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Strengthening School-Family-Community
Partnerships
Outcomes:
1. Establish the importance of family and community connections
2. Evaluate framework approaches to school-family-community involvement 
3. Identify strategies for implementing school-family-community involvement at each
tier of MTSS
4. Review tools and resources for assessing school-family-community partnerships

What are School-Family-Community Partnerships?
Fostering a Collaborative and Supportive Environment
Schools, families, and communities all play a central role in supporting children's success and
wellbeing. In this lesson, we will learn how to make the most of these resources by working
together as a team! To start, let’s review what school-family-community partnerships are.
Deffnition: School-family-community partnerships involve a collaborative relationship
between families, educators, providers, and community partners to support student
learning and improve the health of every learner.  
From this foundational deﬁnition, school-family-community partnerships can grow in their
own unique ways, especially as different schools, families, and communities engage in
partnerships to meet their unique needs. A great example of how school-family-community
partnerships can differ from one another is who is included within those partnerships.   

Families can include: 
- any caretakers or people with signiﬁcant relationships with
children 
- biological or adoptive parents, step-parents, or guardians who
are primary caretakers
- family members such as siblings, grandparents, aunts, uncles, or
others
- any other community members with signiﬁcant relationships to
students, such as close family friends

Sometimes, school-family involvement is also referred to as parent-
school involvement. The term “families” is preferred here because it
is more inclusive of various family structures, such as adoptive
parents, grandparents, step-parents, and many other family
members who step in to support children in the community.

Community partners may include: 
- health organizations (mental health centers, pediatrician’s offces, etc.)
- local businesses
- non-proﬁt organizations (local foodbanks, homeless shelters, libraries, etc.)
- any other community organizations that support students
The previous lesson on team-based leadership discussed how creating the roadmap with teams
at the district and school level is key; the same applies here! Families and communities are
crucial partners as the journey to MTSS is embarked upon. Now that we’ve established a base
deﬁnition of what school-family-community partnerships are, let’s look at the how behind
them!


Involving or Engaging?
Imagine trying to build a roadmap with a partner that you do not speak to. Saying it'd be a
challenge puts it lightly! It is important for communication to ﬂow back and forth from families
to schools and from schools to families. Trust is built over time and develops as families become
comfortable with the school supporting their child and schools feel the same way towards
families.  
In other words, families and schools build partnerships by being engaged with one another.
However, engagement may be substituted for involvement. Let’s look at the differences between
involvement and engagement now! 
IMAGE HERE
Differences between involvement and engagement, adapted from the Michigan
Department of Education (2020) 
The main difference here is that engagement helps us form an equal, two-way partnership,
rather than a hierarchical or one-way relationship. One way to think about this is the distinction
between doing things for or to families compared to doing things with them as equal partners. 
The transition from involvement to engagement can sound vague and unattainable; let’s look at
some activities that families and communities can participate in as a way to engage with the
school. Epstein et. al (1995) provide six areas of opportunity for partnership: 
1. Parenting: help all families establish home environments to support children as
students 
2. Communicating: design effective forms of school-to-home and home-to-school
communications about school programs and children's progress 
3. Volunteering: recruit and organize parent help and support 
4. Learning at Home: provide information and ideas to families about how to help
students at home with homework and other curriculum-related activities,
decisions, and planning 
5. Decision Making: include parents in school decisions, developing parent leaders
and representatives (representation on MTSS teams) 
6. Collaborating with the Community: identify and integrate resources and services
from the community to strengthen school programs, family practices, and student
learning and development

Click through the ffashcards to see examples of
meaningful engagement! 
Parenting: Family support groups, Workshops on parenting skills, Parent education
Communicating: Parent-teacher conferences, Newsletters, report cards, or student work sent home, Calls, text messages, or emails
about school events, Translators provided as needed
Volunteering: Family support at school events,  Partnering with local charities or service organizations
Learning at Home: Information about curriculum, homework, or class activities, Summer learning, such as
summer reading, Calendars with suggested activities
Decision Making: Parent-teacher organization or association (PTO/PTA), District Community Leadership Team (DCLT)
Councils and committees with family inclusion, Seeking out and applying feedback
Collaborating: Information and referrals for community programs (arts, sports, summer activities, etc.)
Service organization partnerships, Alumni programs

Before we move onto focus on the "why" we ought to partner with families speciﬁcally, reﬂect
on your own setting and think of which examples of meaningful engagement would best ﬁt
your community!

If everyone is moving forward together, then success
takes care of itself.
Henry Ford, American Industrialist



Why Partner with Families? 
Unlocking the Power of Collaboration: The Beneﬁts of School-Family Partnerships
Now that we have a better idea of what family partnerships are, let's take a look at some of the
reasons why family engagement is mutually beneﬁcial. First, review the following video which
highlights a successful parent-school relationship. In this video, you’ll meet Mardee King who
has been the student services coordinator for Medical Lake School District in Washington for
over 30 years. You’ll also meet Nikki, a parent and family partner in the Medical Lake School
District as well as a mother, grandmother, and advocate for one of her children who is
diagnosed with ASD and ADHD. 
Following the video, we will walk through more reasons why school-family-community
partnerships are key throughout your MTSS. 
As you saw in the video, family involvement can play a powerful role in improving our schools.
Let’s take a closer look at some of the ways family engagement can make our schools stronger.

Successful family engagement can: 
Increase Equitable Outcomes –
Schools are part of diverse communities with many types of people of different races, cultures,
and identities. Engaging all community members can help promote an understanding and respect
for diversity in the school environment. Including family voice and choice, and ensuring that all
cultures are represented, helps to create a better connection between the community children
live in and the schools they attend. Inclusion of all voices also creates an environment of mutual
respect where all perspectives are valued. 
Increase Effectiveness of Interventions –
Engaging with families is also helpful for students who receive interventions. Engagement helps
because many interventions involve parent/caregiver support, such as Parent-Child Interaction
Therapy (PCIT). Even when interventions do not require direct family support, having parents
and families on the same page as school-based providers can help support treatment and enable
students to reach goals faster. 
Improve Academic Outcomes –
While students spend a signiﬁcant amount of time in school, a great amount of learning happens
at home as well. Families can be an extremely valuable asset in supporting student academics at
home. Families can: 
help students with homework  
encourage students to value education 
help students keep track of work 
provide their perspective on the material students learn 
create consistent expectations across the home and school environments  
This helps support student success and can improve academic outcomes, such as grades and test
scores. Academics can also be supported through strong family-teacher relationships—when
teachers have strong communication with families, everyone is on the same page. 
Reduce Behavioral Concerns –
Engaging families helps with behavior management by creating consistent expectations across
home and school environments. When students have rules that align at home and at school, they
are more easily able to meet the expectations of both.   
Increase Student Involvement in Extracurriculars –
Family engagement with the school can also encourage students to participate in extracurricular
activities: when families are in communication with schools, they are more aware of what
opportunities are available and more likely to encourage their children to participate.  
In addition to this wide evidence supporting the effectiveness of school-family-community
partnerships, legal requirements also support family and community engagement. Let’s look at
those now.


Legal Considerations
Two main pieces of legislation impact school and family partnerships: the Individuals with
Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA) and the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Both laws aim
to support students, and both involve requirements for family engagement.

EVERY STUDENT SUCCEEDS ACT (ESSA)
The Every Student Succeeds Act is a wide-reaching piece of legislation that impacts schools in
many ways. This piece of legislation was enacted in 2015 with the goal of increasing equal access
to quality education for all students in the United States. As part of this goal, guidelines are
provided for how to best engage families and parents.  
Highlights from the requirements outlined by this act include:  
- providing information for parents about the content covered in school, assessments, and
student progress 
- providing materials and training to help parents help their children 
- providing education to educators on how to best partner with families 
- coordinating with other programs, such as pre-school and parent resource centers 
- having communication that is understandable to families (translated in multiple languages
as needed) 
The act also includes suggested practices, such as:  
- using family feedback for school professional development activities 
- providing literacy training to parents and families 
- using funds for potential family expenses, such as transportation or childcare 
- encouraging families to connect with each other to support one another’s involvement 
- having ﬂexibility in meeting with families: having ﬂexible times and locations that may be
outside of the school 
- establishing district-wide family councils 
- partnering with community-based organizations and businesses 
There is much more to ESSA in addition to the practices listed above. Be sure to check with your
school administrators and leadership to see how your unique school meets the requirements of
this act.  


INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES IN EDUCATION ACT (IDEA)
The Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA) is another wide-reaching piece of
legislation that supports students with a diagnosed disability, such as ADHD, autism, blindness,
deafness, and many others (for a full listing, see our “Cultural Humility” lesson). This act also
includes requirements for family involvement in the process of developing Individualized
Education Plans (IEPs) for students. This is especially relevant for family engagement at the Tier 3
level for students receiving interventions. Some highlights from this act include:  
- requiring families to be in attendance at IEP meetings at an agreed-on time and place 
- requiring schools to reach out to parents in advance 
- requiring translators for families who are deaf or speak other languages 
While these guidelines are speciﬁc to students with IEPs, they are also best practices for other
students in the school as well: some of these guidelines, like requiring translators, are similar to
what is mentioned in ESSA.  

Before we move onto more practical ways we can support school-family-community
partnerships, let’s apply what you’ve learned so far about the importance of family-school
partnerships speciﬁcally.



How to Support School-Family-Community Partnerships
Utilizing the Dual Capacity-Building Framework to Overcome
Challenges and Meet Goals
Trying to create a roadmap on your own, without help, to a place you haven't been before would
be overwhelming and potentially frightening. The good news is that you’re not searching for
how to do this on your own! Aside from working as a team within your school, you have tools to
guide you. One of the key tools that will aid you in practically building school-family-community
partnerships is the Dual Capacity-Building Framework. 

Dual Capacity-Building Framework
The Dual Capacity-Building Framework is an evidence-based set of recommendations for
promoting family engagement. The goal of this framework is to increase effective engagement
by addressing the many challenges or barriers to engagement that families and educators may
face through developing relationships and building the capacity of both groups. 
As shown in the graphic below, there are several components to the Dual Capacity-Building
Framework.  Click on the graphic to enlarge it. 
Graphic depiction of the Dual Capacity Building Framework
That image can look overwhelming; don’t worry. We’re about to break it down! To start, there
are four main components of the Dual Capacity-Building Framework: 
1 The Challenge
2 Essential Conditions
3 Policy and Program Goals
4 Capacity Outcomes
Let's unpack each of these items in more detail.

Component 1: The Challenge
The Challenge component of the Dual Capacity-Building Framework focuses on some of the
diffculties that both educators and families may face in trying to connect. The theory suggests
that while educators and parents both acknowledge the importance of family-school-
community partnerships, and both want to support children's academic success, various
obstacles can interfere with this goal.  
On the educator side, some of these challenges include:  
- Lack of training or guidelines for how to intentionally build positive relationships with families  
- Lack of time or other resources 
- Cultural differences
- Language barriers
- Lack of administrative support
- Negative past experiences, stereotypes, or deﬁcit mindsets about community members
On the family side, challenges may include: 
- Cultural differences and/or language barriers  
- Negative previous experiences, such as feeling unwelcomed, judged, or dismissed  
- Limited time and competing priorities
- Transportation or childcare needs  
As you may have noticed, educators and families may face similar challenges, such as: cultural
or linguistic differences, time pressure and other commitments, negative previous interactions,
or stereotypes about each other. Notably, educators and families don't lack the desire or effort to
connect, and they can overcome barriers by intentionally working together. The remainder of
the Dual Capacity-Building Framework addresses these challenges and empowers educators
and communities to work together.

Component 2: Essential Conditions
Essential conditions are in place to help us respond to the challenges of family engagement and
are needed to successfully develop partnerships. They can be divided into two categories:
process and organizational.  
Process conditions relate to steps or action items that are taken to support the building of
partnerships. Click through the ﬂashcards to learn more. 
1 of 5
Linked to learning: School-family-community partnerships should be linked to the learning that students do in the classroom. This shows families the expectations for their children and helps connect back to the goal of supporting children academically. An example of being linked to learning is providing families with handouts that provide extra information on what the student learned in class, as well as pointers and resources the family can use to help students with homework. 
2 of 5
Relational: To build effective partnerships, there needs to be strong relationships between families and schools built on trust and respect. This takes time and consistency. You can start with emails or phone calls introducing yourself as an educator or staff member, or work with your school administration to draft an introduction as a school! Key ways to build trust include responding to families or community partners within a set timeframe, asking open-ended questions, and seeking input on matters relevant to them.   
3 of 5
Developmental: Effective partnerships have the development of the community in mind; they seek to empower equal partnerships. This involves using a growth mindset: partnerships can always continue evolving and improving over time. For example, you may want to start with student volunteers or asking for school supply donations instead of jumping directly to a community partner sponsored event. This allows for relationship building and resource scaling!  
4 of 5
Collaborative: Partnerships should seek to truly involve all parties in collaborative and collective problem-solving. This is where two-way communication is needed to ensure that you are working with families. Examples of collaboration include having families on councils, collecting surveys regarding families’ experiences within the school, and seeking their input on schoolwide expectations. 
5 of 5
Interactive
These partnerships go beyond information dissemination or one-way communication and give partners the opportunity to actively engage. Some ways that partners can engage include: providing and receiving feedback, practicing skills, applying what has been learned, and participating in dialogues and discussions. 

Organizational conditions refer to conditions that must be met from an organizational
perspective, including the leadership teams for schools and districts. The organizational
conditions that must be met are reviewed in depth in the ﬂashcards below! 
1 of 3
Systemic: School-family-community partnerships are not random acts done at any time. They are systemic, ingrained in the school system, and considered an essential aspect of education. For example, the effort for starting or sustaining partnerships does not rest on a handful of educators who are interested but is instead explicitly supported by administration and planned for. 
2 of 3
Integrated: Policies and practices promoting school-family-partnerships are
considered within the full context of the school and are integrated into systems already in place. An
example of integration looks like including family members in school councils that are already running.
3 of 3
Sustained: Partnerships carried out consistently using the resources of the school and district over long periods of time rather than sporadically. Partnerships are planned for, part of the school culture, and able to last. This can look like bidirectional communication with families through weekly emails or phone calls instead of solely relying on end of term reviews or reaching out when there is an issue. 
Now that we’ve reviewed the conditions necessary to overcome the challenges, let’s look at the
next phase in the Dual Capacity-Building Framework: goals!


Component 3: Policy and Program Goals
Policy and program goals are unique to each school and district, but can be divided into four
categories: capabilities, connections, conﬁdence, and cognition. Use the tabs below to learn
more about each of those categories!

Capabilities: Human capital, skills, and knowledge –
These are goals focused on empowering families and educators to work together. For educators,
this could include building skills in cultural competence and humility, training in family
engagement, and any other resources needed to enable them to engage. For families, this can
include access to knowledge about student academics in the school, information about how to
navigate the school system, and other support or advocacy. 

Connections: Important relationships and networks, social capital –
Successful partnerships involve networks of relationships and social connections to enable
families to have the social capital to engage effectively.  Goals here can look like policies
regarding how often families are to be contacted and when, and distinct periods of seeking input
from families or community partners on how to better serve them and connect. 

Confidence: Individual level of self-efffcacy –
It is important for educators and communities to have conﬁdence and comfort in engaging with
each other. This means that educators have the resources needed to engage successfully, and
families are welcomed and shown that they are valued. 
Practically, this can look like setting aside rooms or times (e.g., every other Friday; Wednesdays
at 3:45 PM) for family engagement so that educators know that their administration supports
their family engagement efforts. Another example is ensuring that translators are available at the
school so that families who speak another primary language have the conﬁdence to engage with
the school instead of feeling intimidated by the language barrier. 

Cognition: Assumptions, beliefs, and worldview –
Assumptions, beliefs, and worldviews inﬂuence the attitudes and willingness of educators,
families, and the community to engage with each other. When educators, families, and
communities feel valued, believe in the importance of collaborating, and are committed, they are
able to build strong relationships. Providing continuing education opportunities for educators to
learn more about the value of family engagement or committing to restorative practices between
families and educators or staff who’ve experienced brokenness in their partnership are practical
examples of goals related to cognition. 
Once policy and program goals are in place, capacity outcomes can be reviewed!


Component 4: Capacity Outcomes
Capacity outcomes are the desired results of the policy and program goals. Ultimately, the main
outcome is an effective partnership that supports student and academic success. There are also
goals within this for both educators and families. For educators, some goals might be to:  
- View families and communities with understanding and strengths-based lens  
- Create a school/district culture that is open, accepting, and welcoming to families  
- Connect family/community involvement with student learning  
For families, some goals might be: 
- Support student learning and development
- Help monitor student time, behavior, and resources
- Encourage positive self-image and growth mindset for children
- Act as role models for students
- Collaborate with schools: act as leaders and/or advocates for children 
These are the four components of the Dual Capacity-Building Framework, but that’s not all
there is to it! The Dual Capacity-Building Framework also provides suggested strategies to
increase engagement.  
Let’s take a closer look at two of the suggested strategies: parent-teacher home visits and
academic parent-teacher teams.     


Parent-Teacher Home Visits
Parent-teacher home visits are one tool for increasing engagement recommended by the Dual
Capacity-Building Framework. This strategy involves educators visiting the homes of students
in their school to get to know the students' community and environment. These visits can
happen over the summer or at the beginning of the school year and can be an initial point of
contact for parents and teachers.
The purpose of this visit is not to report any problems, address any concerns, or suggest
anything. The visit is conducted to get to know the families and communities in the school
better and develop a trusting relationship. It is important to communicate to families that these
visits are purely about building relationships—some families may assume that this visit is due to
a concern that the school may have or feel like they are being investigated. Making it clear that
this is just to build a relationship is key for building trust and buy-in.  
From a parent’s perspective, hear how these visits can be helpful: 
“To make a long story short, that home
visit was the best visit of my life. Now, the
teacher and I are so connected. I really
appreciate these home visits; when I was
coming up we received home visits, but
they were for CPS or they were for
attendance issues. Home visits were for a
lot of negative issues and so there are a lot
of negative connotations around the idea
of home visits. I’m glad that is changing.”
- Ellen Little, Parent

Academic Parent Teacher Teams
Another tool is academic parent-teacher teams (APTT), a model of parent engagement
developed by Dr. Maria Paredes. These are based on parent-teacher conferences but involve a
group of parents meeting with a teacher to discuss the activities and curriculum going on in
class.  
The goal of these meetings is to provide families with a network so they can interact with each
other and increase their conﬁdence about engagement. This is achieved through three 75-
minute group meetings and one 30-minute individual meeting with parents each school year.  
This can also be a powerful tool for engagement, as evidenced by the following quote from an
educator describing their experience:
“Parents meet up to the expectations that teachers have for
parents, and then teachers meet up to the expectations that
parents have for teachers. I know what the parent wants for
their child, and they know what I want from their child and
from them. I do my part, they do their part, and then the
child does their part. We become the team.”
- Sheryl Garner, Teacher
These aren’t the only possibilities for increasing engagement. Look at the table below for a
variety of different ideas, organized by its level of impact (i.e., low, moderate, high) adapted from
the Michigan Department of Education (2020). 

TABLE HERE
Chart displaying low, moderate, and high-impact activities for engagement
Once plans for increasing the strength of school-family-community partnerships are in place,
you don’t have to sit around and wonder or guess how effective those plans are! There are ways
to assess the effectiveness of the partnerships more objectively. You’ll learn more about that
next, after a knowledge check!




Assessing School-Family-Community Partnerships
Checking the Pulse on Partnerships  
You don't set off with the roadmap and your travel companions and never check in with either
again. You periodically check the roadmap and ask your company how they're doing and what
they need! Once school-family-community partnerships are in place, the next step is to
determine their effectiveness and if goals are being met.  To do this, there are many available
resources. Let’s review some of those now! 
PBIS Assessments
While this resource is provided by the national center for PBIS, it can also be used in any school
that involves school-family-community partnerships. This assessment measures: 
- Connections
- Shared Decision Making
- Expectations
- Discipline Systems
- Satisfaction
- Your Perspectives
Surveys like these can be integral in producing data that can inform decisions. They provide
families and educators conﬁdential or anonymous ways to express their needs and can function
as an objective accountability measure. 

PBISApps
PBISApps empower educators to make data-driven decisions in real time for
the best student outcomes. The SWIS Suite: Powerhouse reports for schools.
PBIS Assessment: Measure effectiveness and school climate for free. PBIS
Evaluation: Reports for districts, regions & states.

Measures of Partnerships
Another tool for measuring the strength of your partnerships comes from the Wisconsin
Department of Public Instruction. This rubric-style assessment includes questions about
parenting and family skills, communicating, learning at home, volunteering, decision making,
and collaborating with the community. This may sound familiar—this rubric is based on the
same six activities of parental involvement discussed in the beginning of this lesson!   

Flamboyan Center 
This rubric was designed by the Flamboyan Center and rooted in research. It provides an in-
depth list of objectives for family and school engagement. There are three main components to
this rubric: a welcoming and engaged culture, supporting student achievement, and investing
families and community partners in student success. Each of these areas have more objectives,
as you can see in the rubric!  

FACE Rubric
This is another rubric designed to assess implementation of school-family-community
partnerships in an MTSS framework. The rubric is broken down and scored in six major
components:  
- Leadership
- Data-informed Goals and Outcomes
- Multidimensional/multi-tiered Approach
- Empowering Families
- Collaborative Problem-solving
This rubric also provides in-depth examples for the various levels of proﬁciency in each of
these components. This rubric can be used to assess your school, as well as to review what
higher levels of proﬁciency at each level might look like.   

Looking at these rubrics or assessments can feel intimidating, especially if school-family-
community partnerships are a new area of focus in your school. Remember, these rubrics
and assessments are goalposts to strive for, not to expect from the beginning! Give
yourself and your school grace as your work towards those. It’s progress, not perfection. 

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- Schools, families, and communities have the common goal of supporting children's
academic success and can make strong teams to help meet this goal
- Family engagement in the school setting is supported by research and policy
recommendations
- There are many systems for implementing family engagement, including the Dual
Capacity-Building Framework
- MTSS provides a structure for enacting family engagement across tiered levels of
support
- Assessments can help you and your school determine areas of strengths and needs
to support effective engagement with families and communities
Cultural Competence in the School Setting



@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Cultural Competence in the School Setting
Outcomes:
1. Comprehend the importance of creating an inclusive school community by valuing and
respecting diverse identities 
2. Differentiate between cultural competence, cultural humility, and cultural
responsiveness 
3. Recognize disproportionality and its negative impact within the school setting
4. Gain the skills to address equity issues, prevent misidentiﬁcation in special education,
and reduce discipline disparities effectively
5. Utilize components of multi-tiered systems for supporting equitable outcomes

The School Setting
A Rich Tapestry
As Maya Angelou, acclaimed author and poet, described, in the school setting, individuals'
identities are complex and made of many components. The school setting comprises a diverse
range of individuals, encompassing students, teachers, administrators, and staff members who
all are part of the school community.  
Students, the heart and soul of any school, represent a rich tapestry of individuals with different
backgrounds, interests, and aspirations. They vary in age, hailing from different stages of their
educational journey, each with their own set of needs and developmental milestones. Whether
they are young learners embarking on their ﬁrst steps into formal education or seasoned
adolescents preparing for the challenges of higher education, students contribute to the vibrant
mix of personalities within the school community. 
Teachers, as the guiding force in the educational process, bring their expertise, passion, and
dedication to the school setting. They come from diverse racial, ethnic, and cultural
backgrounds, reﬂecting the broader mosaic of society. With their distinct teaching styles,
pedagogical approaches, and subject matter expertise, teachers play a crucial role in shaping
learning experiences and fostering an inclusive environment for students. 
Administrators provide the essential framework and support that enables the school to function
effectively. Their roles encompass a wide range of responsibilities, from managing resources
and coordinating programs to establishing policies and promoting a positive school culture.
Like other members of the school community, administrators contribute their unique identities
and experiences, inﬂuencing decision-making processes and fostering an environment
conducive to growth and learning. 
The dedicated staff members behind the scenes play an integral part in maintaining the smooth
operation of the school. From custodial staff ensuring a clean and safe environment to cafeteria
workers providing nourishment to students, these individuals contribute their skills and
expertise to the overall wellbeing of the school community. They too have their own diverse
identities, adding to the richness and inclusivity of the school environment. 
Overall, in the school setting, individual’s identities are complex and made of many
components, including:
age
race 
ethnicity 
gender
religious beliefs
political beliefs
primary language 
ability or disability status
...and many more. Identities are important because they shape our experiences, perspectives,
and values. When these experiences and perspectives are valued and respected, everyone is able
to feel welcomed and contribute to the school community.  
We all should know that diversity makes for a rich
tapestry, and we must understand that all the threads of
the tapestry are equal in value no matter what their color.
Maya Angelou
Another important component to acknowledge about identity is the concept of intersectionality.
This term, coined by Kimberlé Crenshaw, refers to multiple, overlapping identities and the
impact of this overlap on someone's experiences. For example, a person may be Hispanic and a
Christian. Together, these two identities impact the person's perspective and experience as they
interact with each other, making an identity that is different from someone who is Hispanic and
a different religion, or Christian and a different ethnicity.  
When thinking about identities, it is important to recognize that having a multitude of identities
is a strength to have in the community and in schools. For student and school success, it is
essential to have an environment that is open and accepting to all. Beyond the mere presence of
different identities existing in a community, everyone's full participation being expected,
equally welcomed, and valued creates a strong and successful environment. 
Research shows that communities with many identities are more innovative, have better
educational outcomes, and show stronger critical thinking skills (Offce of Planning,
Evaluation, and Policy Development Offce of the Under Secretary U.S. Department of Education
November 2016).  
When differences in schools are respected and valued, strong and supportive communities are
cultivated. 
Given the great number of different identities in the school setting, it is important to
intentionally ensure that all identities feel supported and welcomed. Cultural competence,
humility, and responsiveness help to achieve this goal.


Cultural Competence, Humility, and Responsiveness
Fostering Inclusive Practices
Understanding the differences between cultural competence, humility, and responsiveness is
essential for creating a truly inclusive and supportive school community. Each of these
principles brings a unique perspective and set of skills that contribute to building positive
relationships, promoting understanding, and valuing diversity. By recognizing these
distinctions, educators and individuals within the school setting can effectively navigate the
complexities of identities, address biases and stereotypes, and cultivate an environment where
every individual feels respected, valued, and able to fully participate. Therefore, gaining insights
into the nuances of cultural competence, humility, and responsiveness is vital to foster an
inclusive and equitable educational experience for all.

CULTURAL COMPETENCE
Cultural competence is a broad concept that aims to increase a person’s ability to interact
effectively with people of various backgrounds. Cultural competence is important in any ﬁeld and
can be used as a tool to improve outcomes in a school setting as well.     
Cultural competence implies a level of proﬁciency at which a person no longer needs to continue
learning, and it assumes that one can be competent in a culture in the same way that one may be
proﬁcient in a foreign language or driving a car. However, there are some limitations to cultural
competence. For example, the reality of working with people from diverse backgrounds is that
the lines between ‘competent’ and ‘incompetent’ may not be so clear or straightforward. Another
concern with the phrase cultural competence is that competent can imply that the person or
professional is an ‘expert’ on the culture of others, which could be inaccurate. As diversity
continues to grow and cultures continue to change, knowledge continues to need to be adjusted.  

CULTURAL HUMILITY
Cultural humility responds to the concerns of cultural competence by modifying the idea of
competence to humility. Cultural humility involves fostering an open-mindedness to cultures,
with an awareness of your own background and how it inﬂuences your perspective. Cultural
humility is more ﬂexible and implies an ongoing process of learning and considering new
viewpoints from other people, without a belief that any culture may be superior or inferior.

CULTURAL RESPONSIVENESS
Cultural responsiveness is one of the key components of Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS)
and involves adapting practices to meet the cultural needs of people being served. In the school
setting, staff and teachers use culturally responsive practices when they “strive to learn and value
their students’ culture as situated within historical and current sociopolitical contexts to inform
their instruction, scaffold student learning, and sustain students’ culture” (Ladson-Billings,
2014).  This means that culturally responsive education considers students' backgrounds,
understanding that this inﬂuences their perspective and their needs in the school setting. All
students need to be valued, respected, and understood to be successful, and cultural
responsiveness helps to achieve this goal. 
There are many ways to include culturally responsive practices in the school setting. An article by
Kressler, et al (2019) recommends four components of culturally responsive problem-solving to
consider: 
- use data-informed decision making — consider both qualitative and quantitative data when
making decisions
- adapt interventions to cultural needs or consider alternative interventions 
- look for disconnects between student and school cultures  
- examine assessments to ensure they are culturally appropriate 
Again, equity and inclusion are central to cultural responsiveness. What works best for a student
with one background may not be the best for another, and it is important to value and respect
these differences in practice.

Equity and Disproportionality in the School Setting
Breaking Down the Imbalance
With the values of cultural competence, humility, and responsiveness in mind, let’s look at
some of the challenges they can help address. Let’s begin with an understanding of some
essential concepts: equity and disproportionality.

Equity
Equity is an important issue that can be addressed with cultural competence, humility, and
responsiveness. One way to deﬁne equity comes from the Council of Chief State School Offcers
(CCSSO,2021), which states that equity is when: “every student has access to the educational
resources and rigor they need at the right moment in their education across race, gender,
ethnicity, language, disability, sexual orientation, family background and/or family income”
(p.3).   
At its core, this means that equity is providing students with unique supports based on their
individual needs. Importantly, equity must be distinguished from equality, which provides
everyone with the same supports. To illustrate the difference, examine the pictures below:
	In these images adapted from Shel Silverstein's "The Giving Tree" (1964), you can see that
there is a marked difference between “equality” and “equity.” In the image for equality, both
children are given the same ladder, but one side of the tree is higher than the other. In this
scenario, one of the children still cannot reach the fruit. In the picture depicting equity, this
child is given a taller ladder so that they can reach the fruit as effectively as the other child.  
Issues of equity compared to equality can also exist in the school environment. Education is not
always a level playing ﬁeld; student backgrounds and identities are all different, yet the
curriculum is generally the same for everyone. This can create challenges for students. 
For example, let's consider a history teacher who is administering an exam. One student in this
class may have been diagnosed with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). In a
classroom emphasizing equality, all students would take the same test under the same time
constraints and in the same location. For a student with ADHD, this may result in too many
distractions or a time frame that isn’t long enough to complete the test, which may negatively
impact their performance. In an equitable classroom, the student may have the option to take
the exam with extended time, or in an environment with fewer distractions, in order to level the
playing ﬁeld.   
To illustrate, Kimberlé Crenshaw, lawyer, and civil rights advocate, highlights the importance of
recognizing and addressing the unique needs and circumstances of individual students, such as
providing accommodations or adjustments that promote equity in the learning environment in
the quote below.
Treating different things the same can generate as much
inequality as treating the same things differently. 
Kimberlé Crenshaw
Therefore, it is crucial to strive for equitable practices that acknowledge and respond to the
diverse needs and experiences of students, fostering an inclusive and supportive educational
environment.

Deﬁning Disproportionality
While equity is ideal in the school setting, it may be diffcult to achieve. When equity is not
achieved, this is called disproportionality. Disproportionality is a difference in outcomes based
on certain factors. In a school setting, “having signiﬁcant disproportionality means that
students of a particular race/ethnicity are signiﬁcantly more likely than their other-race peers
to be identiﬁed as students with disabilities, identiﬁed in a particular disability category, placed
in a particular educational setting, or suspended/expelled as a disciplinary measure.” (National
Center for Learning Disabilities, 2020). In this lesson, you will examine two key components of
disproportionality in the school setting: 
1. Special Education Identiﬁcation
2. Discipline Disparities
Let’s examine each component!

Special Education Identiﬁcation
The identiﬁcation of students for special education is a complex process that involves assessing
various aspects of a student's needs, abilities, and learning challenges. However, this process
can be inﬂuenced by certain factors that result in disproportionality, where certain groups of
students are overrepresented or underrepresented in special education programs compared to
their representation in the overall student population. 
Disproportionality in special education identiﬁcation has been a longstanding concern,
particularly when it relates to subjective diagnoses. It highlights the need for cultural
competence and humility within the assessment and placement process. When cultural
competence and humility are not effectively incorporated into the special education
identiﬁcation process, there is a risk of biases and stereotypes inﬂuencing decision-making.
This can result in the misidentiﬁcation or under identiﬁcation of students from culturally
diverse backgrounds, leading to disparities in access to appropriate educational support. It is
crucial for educators and professionals involved in special education to be aware of these
potential pitfalls and strive to approach the identiﬁcation process with sensitivity, fairness, and
an understanding of the intersecting identities and experiences of students. 
By promoting cultural competence and humility in special education, professionals can enhance
their ability to accurately identify students' needs, provide targeted support, and reduce
disparities. Emphasizing the importance of understanding cultural nuances and recognizing the
potential for bias and disproportionality contributes to fostering an inclusive and equitable
educational environment, where every student's unique strengths and challenges are
acknowledged and addressed. 
Click through the items on the graphic below to explore
some qualifying diagnoses covered under IDEA:
Speciffc learning disability:
Specific learning disability is a broad category that includes disorders affecting a child's ability to read,
write, or do math, such as dyslexia, dysgraphia, or dyscalculia.
Other health impairment:
Other health impairments include various disorders that can impact a child's ability to learn, such as
ADHD. 
Autism spectrum disorder:
Autism spectrum disorder is a wide spectrum of developmental disability that can look different in each
child diagnosed with it, but it generally impacts social skills and behavior. 
Emotional disturbance:
Emotional disturbance can refer to various disorders impacting mood, such as anxiety or depression.
Speech or language impairment:
Speech or language impairments are any disabilities that impact a child's ability to talk or understand
language, such as speech sound disorder, articulation disorder, or receptive language disorder.
Visual impairment:
Visual impairments involve problems with vision that impact academic performance, such as blindness or
partial blindness (note: this doesn't include visual problems that can be corrected with glasses, such as
astigmatism or near-sightedness).
Blind-deafness:
This category describes children who meet the diagnosis of blindness and deafness.
Deafness:
This category fits children who have been diagnosed with deafness. Usually, this diagnosis is made by a
pediatrician or other medical professional.
Hearing impairment:
Hearing impairment applies to children who have hearing difficulties other than deafness.
Orthopedic impairment:
Orthopedic impairment is a disability relating to movement. Some examples include cerebral palsy, spina
bifida, muscular dystrophy, or multiple sclerosis.
Intellectual disability:
Intellectual disability involves difficulty learning and processing information, difficulties with social
interactions or abstract thought, delayed development, or difficulties with self-care activities. Intellectual
disability can be related to many disorders, such as Down syndrome, and can range from mild to severe.
Traumatic brain injury:
Traumatic brain injury results from especially damaging injuries to the brain and skull, such as those from
a car accident. These injuries can impact cognition, concentration, or development. The severity of
traumatic brain injury can vary and result in different impacts. 
Multiple disabilities:
Students can also be impacted by multiple disabilities at the same time. For example, a student might be
diagnosed with ADHD and depression. These two disabilities together may need unique support compared
to each one individually.

When considering referring students to special education, use the student's context to view
them holistically. There are many potential explanations for a student's diffculties or
challenges in the classroom, and these may or may not be related to the disability categories
described above. Because of possible alternative explanations, it is always crucial to consider
what may be causing a student's diffculties in the classroom when considering special
education services. While many students do need access to special education, it may not be the
right ﬁt for other students. Misidentiﬁcation can result in:   
- Not providing the right supports or addressing the true root of the issue
- Students missing opportunities for exposure to rigorous curriculum
- Inappropriate lowering of expectations for the student because of the stigma of a
special education label
- Lowering of self-esteem for students
- Increasing racial disparities when students of marginalized races are more often
misidentiﬁed
When students are identiﬁed for special education, it can also inﬂuence the likelihood that they
will be placed in more restrictive settings, with discrepancies between students with special
needs being placed in self-contained classrooms and being integrated into general education
classrooms (National Center for Learning Disabilities, 2020). This is a problem because
research supports the inclusion of students with special needs in general education classrooms:
it improves academic outcomes, provides socialization opportunities, provides all students the
opportunity to access challenging material, and increases the diversity of the classroom.   
When considering special education identiﬁcation and placement, it is important to remember
our key value of equity: providing students with the support that meets their individual needs.
Special education services are extremely valuable and can help level the playing ﬁeld for
students who are correctly identiﬁed; however, it can also be damaging to students who are
misidentiﬁed. 

Discipline Disparities
It is also essential to address the issue of discipline disparities in order to promote a fair and
inclusive educational environment. There are also signiﬁcant disproportionalities in student
discipline, particularly for exclusionary discipline.  
Exclusionary discipline refers to any discipline that removes students from the classroom, such
as suspensions or expulsions. This type of discipline is susceptible to disproportionality,
particularly for students with disabilities or from marginalized races.
When assessing the use of exclusionary discipline practices, it is important to note that these
practices: 
- Are unlikely to improve behavior
- Do not teach replacement behaviors; instead of teaching students what to do, it
- only teaches what not to do
- Increase the likelihood of students being held back or dropping out
- Lead to missed instructional time for students
- Lead to a student's perceptions of not belonging in the school system
- Increase the likelihood of students entering the juvenile justice system
Despite these issues in the use of exclusionary discipline, it is still an extremely common
practice. By the time of high school graduation, 1 in 3 students will have been suspended or
expelled.  
Nationwide data reﬂects trends of disproportionality in the use of exclusionary discipline
practices. Data collected by the United States Department of Education highlights discrepancies
by gender, race, and disability status. 
To review the data in detail, select the links below.    
Nationwide Disproportionality Across Race and Gender
This infographic provides information on nationwide trends in disproportionalities for suspensions and
expulsions across race and gender.
CLICK HERE
Nationwide Disproportionality for Students with Disabilities
This infographic shows national trends for disproportionality for students with disabilities and the
intersections of race and gender.
CLICK HERE
A review of the nationwide data provided by the U.S. Department of Education's Offce for Civil
Rights illustrates:
Stark contrasts for gender: 
While boys make up 51.4% of student enrollment, they make up 69.5% of in-school
suspensions, 70.5% of out-of-school suspensions, and 72.7% of expulsions.  
Imbalances in race, particularly for African American students:  
While African American boys make up 7.7% of enrollment, they make up 20.1% of in-
school suspensions, 25% of out-of-school suspensions, and 26% of expulsions: this is
more than triple their enrollment percentage. There is a similar disproportionality for
African American girls; while African American girls make up 7.4% of enrollment, they
make up 11.2% of in-school suspensions, 13.3% of out-of-school suspensions, and 11.8%
of expulsions.  
Staggering data for children with disabilities:
While students with disabilities comprise 15.9% of the student population, they account
for 28% of out-of-school suspensions.  
African American students make up 17.7% of students receiving disability supports, but
35.7% of out-of-school suspensions. This shows evidence of intersectionality: the two
identities of race and disability status together can inﬂuence students' educational
outcomes. 

Reﬂection
Now that you have reviewed some disproportionality data, consider the
following questions: 
- Did any of the data surprise you? Why or why not?
- How do you think your school compares to the nationwide data?
- Does your MTSS team have plans for responding to disproportionality if
 it is indicated in the data?
Implementing data-driven decision making is one of the ﬁrst steps districts and schools can
take to address disproportionality and create a more equitable and inclusive learning
environment for all students. School districts can: 
- Regularly collect and analyze data related to student outcomes, discipline, and
 access to educational opportunities. 
- Identify patterns of disproportionality and use the data to inform targeted
 interventions and support systems. 
- Monitor progress and make adjustments to strategies based on ongoing data
 analysis.
For more information on using data to identify and
address disproportionality within your district or school
team, download and review the Center for PBIS Guide
below. 



How Does MTSS Help Support Cultural Competence?
Exploring the Role of MTSS in Supporting Equitable and Inclusive Practices
There are several reasons why MTSS is a good tool for intentionally addressing potential bias or
disproportionality in the school setting.
- Emphasis on culturally responsive assessments and interventions  
- Promotion of proactive, preventive, early intervention  
- Reliance on data-informed decision making 
- Emphasis on high-quality and evidence-based practices
- Team-based decision making and strong leadership
- Professional development for addressing biases and use of evidence-based
 culturally responsive practice

Cultural Responsiveness in MTSS
Earlier, you learned about cultural responsiveness and how it can be used to support positive
outcomes for all students. One multi-tiered system speciﬁc to behavior is Positive Behavior
Interventions and Supports (PBIS) as outlined in the “All Hands on Deck” course. There are
several components to successfully implementing culturally responsive PBIS (Leverson, et al.,
2021). While these are presented as characteristics of PBIS, they are relevant features of any
well-functioning MTSS.
Click through the following tabs to review key features.

IDENTITY
To promote effective interactions and understanding, it is crucial for practitioners in the school
setting, such as teachers, administrators, and mental health clinicians, to recognize their own
identities and perspectives. Similarly, students' identities encompass various aspects, including
race, ethnicity, ability status, religion, language, and more, which should be understood beyond
categorization. It is important to separately identify the unique identities of students' families.
Considering the broader community's identities, beliefs, values, and the school's relationship with
it helps establish partnerships and comprehend students' backgrounds. This understanding
enables schools to foster connections with community organizations and acknowledge the
contextual factors inﬂuencing students' experiences. 

VOICE
Giving all community members involved in the school a voice is important to ensure that all
perspectives are considered and valued. Diversity exists in communities, so it is important to
make sure that all voices are included. As stated by EdWeek.org (2018), "Education is strongest
when diverse perspectives and voices are shared and heard in settings of learning and
development. In the classroom and the surrounding community, a rich educational opportunity is
available to those who are able to create an environment in which varying ideas and insights built
on broad backgrounds can make themselves known." By embracing and amplifying diverse
voices, schools can create an environment that fosters a robust educational experience and
embraces the wealth of perspectives within the community.
Voices can be included in activities like the school Parent Teacher Association (PTA) or volunteer
events, where families can engage with the school in leadership roles. It is also important to
consider two-way communication: schools do not just communicate with or ask families for
help, but, rather, families can also let schools know how to best support them.

SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT
A supportive environment is one of the foundations of successful MTSS. This means that there is a
system for creating a positive school culture. Positive school culture is neither punitive nor
restrictive at its foundation. An example of a supportive and positive environment is teaching
appropriate replacement behaviors when problem behaviors arise in students, rather than simply
punishing the problem behavior. A supportive environment allows all students to feel welcomed
and promotes belonging. 

SITUATIONAL APPROPRIATENESS
Situational appropriateness refers to the mindset that different behaviors are needed in different
situations, and support of positive behavior involves teaching students which situations require
which behaviors. 
Some behaviors that are perceived as problematic by school staff may be the result of a cultural
mismatch between the school and the student.
To help with this issue, schools can assess the values and expectations of the community when
establishing school-wide behavior expectations. Then, they can adjust school policies to be in line
with these values or indicate clearly to students when the expectations of the school may differ
from their home environments.
Situational appropriateness helps foster inclusivity. When students and communities have their
values represented in the school setting, it shows that they are appreciated members of the
collective.
 
 
While MTSS provides structures that can help reduce disproportionality, individuals can also
take steps to reduce this issue. One way to do this is by measuring our own implicit bias and
build self-awareness through taking an Implicit Association Test (IAT).   
Use the link below to navigate to the "Project Implicit Health" (PIH) website where you will ﬁnd
15 IATs. Complete a test of your choice, then consider the questions in the next reﬂection
activity.
Implicit bias refers to the unconscious attitudes, stereotypes, or prejudices that affect our
perceptions, actions, and decisions without our conscious awareness. These biases are
deeply ingrained and can inffuence our judgments and behaviors towards certain
individuals or groups, often leading to unintended discrimination or unequal treatment. 

Implicit Bias Reﬂection
 Stones reﬂected in water 
After taking one of the Implicit Association Tests (IAT), reﬂect on the following questions: 
- Did your test results surprise you? Why or why not?
- How might the results of this test impact your interactions in the school setting?
- What action steps can you take moving forward based on the results of this test?
These reﬂection questions are designed to encourage self-awareness and deepen your
understanding of your own biases and attitudes. It is important to approach these questions
with an open mind and without judgment. Remember, there are no right or wrong answers
here. The goal is to gain insights into yourself in order to better understand and support your
students. Take your time to contemplate these questions and consider how you can apply your
newfound awareness to create a more inclusive and equitable learning environment. 
Now, let's further explore the topic of biases and
attitudes by watching a thought-provoking video
featuring diversity advocate Vernā Myers. In this video,
Myers delves into the realm of subconscious attitudes
and biases that one often unknowingly holds. 
Sorry: we can't play video on this browser. Please make sure it's up to date and
that Flash 11.1 or higher is installed. Load this talk on ted.com
The intention of the video was to offer valuable insights and spark deeper reﬂection on the
subconscious attitudes and biases one may possess. Remember, understanding and addressing
these biases is a continuous journey toward fostering a more inclusive and equitable school
environment.

Recommendations and Additional Resources for Equity and Inclusion in Education 
While MTSS practices can help address issues of disparities and inequities, it is imperative that
districts and schools intentionally attend to these issues via policies and procedures. Below are
policy recommendations that address disproportionality and other inequities and help create
school-community environments where all students thrive.

Speciffc Commitment to Equity –
A speciﬁc commitment to equity is a key recommendation for policies regarding
disproportionality. This commitment can be present in the mission statement of a school or
district, a separate statement in policies, or it can be in both. It is important to be clear and
speciﬁc about what is meant by equity in the school or district.   
Here is an example school statement showing a speciﬁc commitment to equity provided by the
PBIS Center (Green, et al., 2015):
“Example High School is committed to high expectations, varied and challenging experiences
relevant for each student, positive and proactive discipline practices, and educational equity for
all students. We are committed to identifying strengths and addressing improvements in the
operations of our school through the continuous use of data as an effort to honor each
component of our mission.”

Family Partnerships in Policy Development –
Including families is another way to promote equity through school policies. Having policies that
speciﬁcally encourage and facilitate the involvement of families ensures that cultural
perspectives are considered and valued.   
Here is an example family partnership policy statement (Green, et al., 2015):   
“One of our primary goals at Example School is to ensure that parents and community members
have opportunities to assist and support the educational process through participation in decision
making, school governance, and volunteer activities. It is our desire to include parents and
community members as an integral part of our students’ learning process. With that said,
Example School has jointly developed with parents, students, and staff a Parent/School Compact,
which outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will work together to ensure our
school maintains a welcoming and positive learning environment that promotes student
success.”

Focus on Implementing Positive, Proactive Behavior Support Practices –
A third way to support equity is to focus behavior management strategies on the prevention of
problem behaviors rather than intervention after the fact. Using this strategy, school staff set
clear, fair expectations and provide a school culture that encourages and teaches positive
behavior. 
Here is an example school procedure indicating this (Green, et al., 2015): 
“Example High School will maintain a positive environment by providing ongoing instruction
and reinforcement of appropriate social and behavior interactions within the school community.
As a school, behavior expectations will be systematically taught in classrooms and in the
common areas (e.g., cafeteria, gym, library) during the ﬁrst two weeks of school, and again in
January when students return from winter break. Throughout the school year, students will
receive positive reinforcement for displaying expected behaviors and reteaching of appropriate
behaviors when those expectations are not met.”

Clear, Objective Discipline Procedures –
To promote equity, schools must clearly deﬁne discipline procedures. 
As mentioned earlier, behavior can be subjective; a problem behavior in one environment may
not be considered a problem behavior in another, and cultural values not only inﬂuence behavior
but also how it is interpreted. To prevent these factors from contributing to inequities, clear
deﬁnitions of positive and negative behavior should be provided to teachers and students, as well
as what indicates a minor or major behavioral concern. 
Review this example to see these principles in action (Green, et al., 2015):  
“The teachers and administrators at Example School have procedures for identifying and
responding to behavior incidents in our building and review them formally on a regular basis. Our
orientation materials and school website include deﬁnitions for the most common problem
behaviors we see in our school, as well as examples of how these behaviors can range from
minor, staff-managed behaviors to major, offce-managed behaviors.” 

Removal or Reduction of Exclusionary Discipline Practices –
As discussed previously, exclusionary discipline practices can contribute to inequity because they
remove students from the classroom, further disrupting the student’s education and
contributing to feelings of exclusion from the school system. They are also frequently
disproportionately applied. To prevent the negative impact of exclusionary discipline practices,
schools can adopt policies that limit their use as much as possible.   
For example, a school could propose (Green et al., 2015):  
“For serious behavior incidents that do not require mandatory expulsion, Example Elementary
School’s multi-disciplinary team will determine appropriate interventions in lieu of out-of-
school suspension. Students who are involved in behavior incidents in this category are required
to participate in activities designed to support development of prosocial skills. See our Graduated
Discipline Policy for alternative responses.” 

Graduated Discipline Systems with Instructional Alternatives to Exclusion –
The next step in reducing exclusionary discipline is to provide alternatives. All problem behaviors
should be addressed, but not all behaviors warrant removal from the classroom environment.
 Deﬁning and categorizing behaviors based on level of severity assists with reduction of
exclusionary discipline.  A graduated system does this by classifying behavior events based on
their severity, leaving only the most severe for exclusionary discipline and responding to
relatively minor incidents through other options.
Here is a sample district policy supporting this concept:  
“Example District believes in the use of graduated discipline to ensure severe punishments, such
as exclusion from the learning environment, are reserved for credible threats to the safety of
others. The goal of all discipline responses is to ensure students understand the school’s behavior
expectations, repair the harm caused by their choice of behavior, and identify how to prevent the
problem in the future. When repeated or serious behavior incidents occur, each school’s
multidisciplinary team will conduct a functional behavior assessment for students to identify
needs for academic and behavior support.” 
When adopting this type of system, it is important to have alternatives to suspensions and
expulsions in mind. Here are a few options:  
- Restorative Justice: aims to repair any harm that is done because of a behavior. It
encourages students to self-reﬂect, empathize with those they may have harmed, and take
actions to restore the issue. An example of restorative justice may be having a student who
sprayed graffti on school property work with the custodial staff to remove it.  
- Mediation: this is another alternative to exclusionary discipline. This tool might be most
relevant for behaviors related to interpersonal conﬂicts or resulting in interpersonal harm.
This approach also encourages self-reﬂection and empathy for people who may have been
harmed as a result of a behavior.  
- Assess communication: examine communication patterns for miscommunications or
cultural mismatches between student and teacher expectations. 
- Provide redirection: redirect behavior through strategies such as a break, additional
activities, or other support.
- Teach appropriate behaviors: redeﬁne expectations as necessary, and provide positive
reinforcement for these behaviors.
- Conferences: use conferences to discuss problems with students, families, teachers, and/or
administrators.

Procedures with Accountability for Equitable Student Outcomes –
Equitable policies and procedures can also beneﬁt from providing accountability. This means that
there are clear standards and expectations in place for the policies listed above and data is used to
make decisions. Procedures with accountability:
-set goals
- outline the steps towards meeting those goals
- provide a roadmap for what is intended so that everyone knows roles and responsibilities
therein
The following is an example of procedures with clear accountability  (Green, et al., 2015):
“Goals: In alignment with our school’s mission and district equity policy, our school leadership
team’s current equity goals are: (1) provide at least two professional development opportunities
annually for teachers and administrators related to culturally responsive behavior support
practices, (2) increase the percentage of students who have positive perceptions of our school
climate to 80% across all racial/ethnic groups as measured by the annual District School Climate
Survey, (3) increase family and community involvement in school activities to 80%, (4) provide
at least one community activity/ﬁeld trip each semester, and (5) monitor disaggregated rates of
ODRs at least quarterly and reduce risk ratios to no more than 1.25 for any group.”  


Let's review the lesson.
- Cultural competence, humility, and responsiveness are key values to apply when
working in the school setting.
- Disproportionality is one issue that may arise in the school setting and often
involves disproportionate rates of exclusionary discipline and special education
identiﬁcation.
- Cultural responsiveness can help prevent disproportionality.
- When determining if disproportionality is present, it is important to use data-
informed decision making.




#####
*****
Building the Foundation with Tier 1- 1.1:
Universal Supports
Family & Student Engagement
Elevating Engagement in Practical Ways


@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 3: Universal Supports
Outcomes:
1. Contextualize the role and purpose of Tier 1 support within core principles of Multi-
tiered System of Supports
2. Understand the key concepts underlying Tier 1 infrastructure
3. Identify Tier 1 best practices

Tier 1 & Universal Supports,The Strong Foundation of All Supports
When skyscrapers are built, the ﬁrst step is to build a steady, fortiﬁed foundation. The
foundation of the structure is one of its most important components: everything that is built depends upon its stability and strength. The foundation supports everything else in the structure. All aspects of the building, from the ﬁrst to the top ﬂoor, begin with and depend on
the foundation. Tier 1 of the Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS) is the foundational level for building a
strong school community. Similar to constructing a skyscraper, a solid Tier 1 foundation offers
the essential support and stability on which every aspect of a resilient school community relies.
Having a shaky or unstable foundation can make building anything on top feel diffcult or
impossible. When a foundation is strong, building your structure can become easier and more effective—the possibilities become endless. The goal of this course is to review some of the key building blocks of Tier 1 so that your school has a solid foundation.
It’s important to note that while having a strong foundation from the start is helpful,
foundations also need to be monitored over time. Supporting Tier 1 is not a one-time endeavor,
but rather a process of building, addressing problems, and re-building over time as needed. Like
many components of MTSS, Tier 1 support is a continuous process. 
Essential to this process of building and maintaining a strong foundation is relationships:
relationships between students and educators, among educators, and among families and
communities all contribute to our ability to effectively work in Tier 1 and throughout MTSS. 


Key Principles of MTSS, A Foundational Review
MTSS is a framework approach for supporting student success in schools. MTSS includes three
levels of support: Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3. These tiers are differentiated based on the intensity of
support needed, allowing support to be individualized for each student depending on the
tier.MTSS aims to help all students at all times through these adaptive, continuous tiers. 
Now that you’ve reviewed the basics of the MTSS framework, click through the image below for
examples of supports that may exist at each level of the pyramid. If you’ve taken our All Hands
on Deck or Core MTSS course, these may look familiar to you!




IMAGE HERE

Tier 3:
Individualized Education Plans (IEPs)
Individual and family counseling/interventions

Tier 2
Check-in, Check-Out system (CICO)
Mentoring programs
Small group tutoring

Tier 1
Schoolwide expectations
Screening
Parent-teacher conferences
Schoolwide celebrations

MTSS is divided into tiers, but there are some practices that are central to MTSS as a whole. 

IMAGE HERE

1. School-Family-Community Partnerships
School-family-community partnerships involve families and communities working in partnerships with
schools. These partnerships help to ensure consistency across the home and school environment, increase
positive academic and behavioral outcomes for students, and build a strong community. Some examples
of school-family-community practices are parent-teacher home visits, parent IEP involvement, and
back-to-school nights.

2. Team-Based Leadership
Team-based leadership sets the stage for all levels of MTSS. Leadership teams, or MTSS teams, exist at
the district and school levels, and there may be multiple teams in each school depending on its needs.
Leadership teams work collaboratively to review data, make decisions about programming, and
implement changes as needed. 

3. Resource Mapping and Needs Assessment
Resource mapping and needs assessments are two related practices that help schools identify the needs
present in a school and the resources available to help meet those needs. This helps schools use resources
effectively to meet the needs of all students. 

4. Tiered Delivery System
The tiered delivery system underlies all aspects of MTSS. One of the benefits of a tiered delivery system is
that support can be matched to the needs of students, whatever those may be. The tiered delivery system
also allows for layering — students receiving multiple supports at the same time, such as Tier 1 and Tier 3
services. This provides a framework for ensuring that all student needs are met. 

5. Universal Screening
Screeners are assessments that are provided to all students to help identify students needing additional
support. Each school uses different screeners, but they are commonly used to assess vision and hearing,
literacy, math skills, and social-emotional health. When students receive results on screeners that indicate
concern, they may be referred to Tier 2 and/or Tier 3 services.

6. Data-informed Decision Making
Data-informed decision making is used to identify students in need of intervention, measure the
effectiveness of programs in place, and make decisions on school improvement. Data can come from
many sources: screening assessments, school records (e.g., attendance, grades, and office discipline
referrals), and observations from teachers, families, or other staff. 

7. Progress Monitoring
Progress monitoring is a process that occurs across all three tiers and uses data to measure student
progress. This process involves setting goals, collecting data, and using the data to determine if goals are
being met. Then, interventions can be modified depending on the results.

8. Cultural Humility
Cultural humility involves awareness of and responsiveness to the great amount of diversity that exists in
school communities. Some best practices for supporting cultural humility include fostering a community
of acceptance and respect, offering implicit bias training, and using disaggregated data to assess and
address disproportionality.

What is Tier 1 Support? A Closer Look at the Fundamentals of Tier 1
As mentioned earlier, this course is focused on the Tier 1 level of MTSS. Tier 1 forms the foundation of our pyramid: Tier 1 practices are universally applied and available for all students.
MTSS pyramid with Tier 1 bolded: School-wide or class-wide prevention/promotion for ALL
At their best, Tier 1 practices are  p r o a c t i v e and p r e v e n t i v e, reducing the need for Tier 2 and Tier 3
services. Tier 1 support ideally meets needs and promotes healthy development for 80-90% of
students, with 10-20% needing Tier 2 and/or Tier 3.  
To hear more about the importance of Tier 1, watch the
video below featuring Andy Sevlin, a district MTSS
coordinator.
As Andy said, ensuring a solid, effective Tier 1 is critical to prevent the “hopping” from one
crisis to another. If a signiﬁcant number of students are being identiﬁed or referred to Tier 2
and Tier 3 services, it’s important to examine your Tier 1 practices. For example, if 35% of
students have several offce discipline referrals and need behavior interventions, effective and
effcient universal practices may be missing or inadequate at Tier 1. If this is the case, below are
issues to consider:
1. Behavior expectations may not be clear to students or educators
2. Instructional practices may not be evidence-based or delivered with consistency or
ﬁdelity (i.e., as intended)
3. Additional barriers to effective practice may be contributing
In summary, if signiﬁcantly more than 20% of students in your school are receiving Tier 2 or 3
services, this calls for a review of Tier 1 practices.  

An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. -Benjamin Franklin, Founding Father & Inventor
For some ideas on how to provide strong Tier 1 support, review the points below. You may
recognize some of these practices from your own school, or you may want to learn more about
them. Stay tuned for more information on each of these practices!

IMAGE HERE


List of Tier 1 best practices
Some of these practices, including but not limited to family-school home visits or schoolwide
expectations, you will learn about in later lessons in this course! For now, it is important to
know that these practices are an outcome of Tier 1’s development.




MTSS Infrastructure, Using Tier 1 Development to Strengthen the Framework
We discussed Tier 1 as the foundation of our district and school MTSS. To take this a step
further, you can think about your Tier 1 development activities as the building blocks behind the
foundation’s infrastructure. When the infrastructure is strong, Tier 1 becomes more robust and
sustainable. This may sound fantastic to you but feel vague and unattainable. You may be asking,
“How, exactly, does this happen? What does this look like in my district and school?” Don’t
worry. There are practical steps for developing Tier 1 at your school, and you can review them
below. These steps can apply to MTSS as a whole, but in this lesson, you will learn more about
them in the context of Tier 1.




Planning
When district and school teams are designing an MTSS for their populations, folks are eager
and ready to get started. This excitement is a good thing! However, it really is necessary to take
the time to plan systems on the front end. By taking steps to carefully and practically develop
programming, it is more likely that schools can follow through on plans rather than burn out
quickly. As the popular phrase goes, “Measure twice, cut once!”
Planning can take many forms. go through the cards below to learn more.

measurement tools: Use measurement tools to narrow your focus. The Self Assessment of MTSS Implementation (SAM 2.0; linked below), endorsed by the SC Department of Education, is one way to gauge your school’s MTSS functioning in 6 domains: leadership, building the capacity and/or infrastructure for implementation, communication and collaboration, data-based problem-solving, the three-tiered instructional and intervention model, and data-evaluation. 

Collaboration: Planning is done best with the input of everyone involved. You wouldn’t build a house without consulting the people who live in it, or an office without taking feedback from those working in it! Conversations with families and community members offer powerful insight into what is important to stakeholders outside the school building. Asking for their input in the planning process instead of their feedback after the fact also encourages trust and respect between schools, families, and community members! 

Data: Examine your school's discipline data thoroughly. Go beyond suspensions into offfce and classroom discipline referrals to look for patterns that need to be addressed. This can look like teacher referrals, attendance,
student self-referral, and more!


Building a System
MTSS is a framework, not a recipe. The Tier 1 system your team builds will act as the scaffolding
or structure for the interventions you choose. The interventions themselves will be unique to
your school based on your needs assessment, input from families and the community, and the
priorities of your MTSS team. For one school, increasing regular attendance may be a top
priority. At another school, teaching students to cooperate with one another may be the main
concern. Keep in mind that the concerns can shift over time. Perhaps once attendance is
addressed, another concern rises to the top. That’s okay! Because MTSS is a framework, you
can use the basic structure of the three-tiered system and adapt the interventions to what your
students, families, and school community need.
Administrators and educators often discuss scaffolding for students when it comes to building
new skills. That is, providing support to meet them where they are, and providing help as they
need it. Think of MTSS in the same way. We are providing supports for our students, families,
and school community to help build skills. MTSS is scaffolding, with interventions selected to
address speciﬁc needs.
When done well, MTSS provides a lasting structure that serves the entire school population. We
don’t want to put our energy into something that will fall to the wayside in a year or two. You
might be wondering how to tell if your school or district is working on a "project" or truly
building a system. Consider how heavily your family and community partners are involved, the
amount of focus on long-range planning, and the inclusion of periodic ﬁdelity checks to make
sure Tier 1 operations are strong. Later on in this lesson, you’ll learn about implementation with
ﬁdelity. There, you’ll ﬁnd measures and resources that will further help you answer your
questions about where your school or district is at with MTSS implementation!If we are using so much of our time, resources, and ingenuity, we want to build a system that
will improve the lives of our students and their families for years to come.


Teaming Structures
Teaming structures, or how your teams for MTSS are set up, are a key component of your MTSS.
Some schools choose to have one MTSS team to cover all students' concerns, while some
schools split their MTSS teams into “academics” and “behavior.” Your team will decide what
teaming structure makes the most sense for your group.
Let’s hear from Jodie Soracco, Director of the Virginia
Tiered Systems and Support Research and
Implementation Center, for more tips on teaming
structures.
As Jodie said, it’s crucial to think about effciency when designing
teaming structures. Look carefully before breaking off into sub-
committees and adding more meetings. With advanced planning,
sticking to an agenda, and pulling data before a meeting, you can
maximize the time you have as an MTSS team and avoid the meeting
merry-go-round.


Long Term Perspective
When developing MTSS as a school or district, it is necessary to need to factor in the amount of
time it takes to reach full implementation. Typically, this is a years-long process. Don’t be
discouraged, though! Although it may seem daunting, this long-range perspective is a good
thing. Your school or district does not need to do everything at once.
Take it one step at a time. What themes came out of your needs assessment? What are the top
concerns your MTSS team wants to address? How will this look at Tier 1? Take the time now to
focus on manageable steps towards implementation. It will all come together.

Fidelity
Fidelity of implementation might sound intimidating at ﬁrst. All this really means is that we’re
checking on ourselves to make sure we are using interventions as they were intended. Of
course, real-world conditions can’t 100% match research-level implementation, but that’s ok.
Real life is messy sometimes. We do, however, want to get as close to the original intervention
design as we can. This helps us reach our intended intervention outcomes for our students and
families. Remember that ﬁdelity checks happen at all 3 tiers of MTSS! 
Check out this video with Kaci Fleetwood, faculty at the University of Nevada-Reno and State
Coordinator for MTSS, for more about measuring ﬁdelity.
Check out this video with Kaci Fleetwood, faculty at the
University of Nevada-Reno and State Coordinator for
MTSS, for more about measuring ffdelity.
Fidelity inventories help us understand in which areas of our implementation we are doing well,
and where we can improve. Fidelity should never be an assumption, especially for interventions
that have been in place for a while. Checking on our ﬁdelity periodically, as a group, helps us all
improve and make sure our interventions are effective. If the intervention does not have the
outcome we expected, this allows us to rule out ﬁdelity as a problem.
There are a variety of ﬁdelity measures available. As mentioned earlier, the Self-Assessment
Measure (SAM 2.0) is a free tool to evaluate school-level MTSS implementation and is endorsed
by the SC State Department of Education. 

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
Here's a brief recap of what you've learned thus far today:
1. A strong Tier 1 is the foundation upon which all of MTSS can stand.
2. Tier 1 practices are preventive and proactive.
3. Developing Tier 1 involves planning, a focus on building a system and not just a "one-time project", communicating with families and community members, solidifying a teaming structure that works for your school, and a long-term
perspective.

As you know, Tier 1 support has many facets. To build your knowledge of Tier 1, you will review
the following topics in this course
1. Elevating Family and Student Engagement
2. School Climate and Safety Enhancement
3. Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations
4. Wellness Enhancement and Stress Reduction for Faculty, Staff, and Students


@@@@@
Lesson 2 of 3: Family & Student Engagement
Outcomes:
1. Demonstrate the importance of leadership's support in elevating strategies to
strengthen outcomes for staff, families, and students
2. Grow in the capability to engage with historically marginalized or otherwise involved
families and students
3. Understand and apply the strategies for restoring relationships with families


Elevating Family Engagement, A Reminder from the SBHA to You
You brieﬂy learned about strengthening school-family-community partnerships in the Core
MTSS course. You've been over the theories, the motivations, and the desired outcomes. This
lesson will go even deeper into why family engagement matters and covers practical ways you,
as a member of a school system, can elevate family engagement in Tier 1. To start, let's recap
what family engagement really means.

What is Family Engagement?
The key elements in both deﬁnitions are active engagement for the betterment of student’s
lives and outcomes. Just as schools aren’t vessels only for academics, families aren’t vessels
only for nurturance and socialization. The role families play in schools cannot be overstated.
Families are the ones who get their students ready for school, pack their lunches, talk to them
about their experiences at school, check their homework, and welcome them home at the end
of the day. Caregivers are the experts on their children, and when they are partnered with
schools, they are powerful forces of change and good. Those in education know this.
Here is what Molly M. Spearman, South Carolina's Superintendent of Education from 2015-
2023, says: “Family engagement is of utmost importance in ensuring each
student has an opportunity to be college, career, and citizenship ready
upon graduation.”
As many educators know, family engagement is not easy or even straightforward! Just like each
student is unique, so is their family. It can be overwhelming to think about elevating family
engagement on your own, but this doesn’t rest on your shoulders alone.
In this lesson, we’ll review practical strategies you can use to elevate family engagement for
every student and every family. This elevation of family engagement starts with clearly
emphasizing the importance of leadership support and involvement. The demonstrated positive
outcomes family engagement has for everyone—students, staff, leadership, and you — can be
the motivation for leadership's support in this endeavor!


The Need for Leadership in Family Engagement, The Role of Leadership in Building Bridges and Breaking Barriers
School leadership builds bridges and breaks down barriers fostering strong and meaningful
connections between families and the educational community. A challenge schools frequently
face is changing from sporadic, event-based family involvement to systemic, integrated family
partnership. To facilitate this shift from one-sided communication to collaborative co-creation,
it is crucial for schools' leadership to actively take the role of bridge-builders and advocates.
Through meaningful connections between families and the educational community, school
leaders play an instrumental role in nurturing an environment that is dedicated to elevating
family engagement. 
Think about a time in your life when you or a colleague, sibling, etc., attempted to facilitate
change in the environment. Whether it was an offce-wide shift or a family policy, what
happened without support from the top? More often than not, those changes die without the
reinforcement of leadership. Leadership support is necessary to bridge the gap between family
engagement theory and reality.
Leadership supporting family engagement is necessary as they:
1. Establish conditions necessary for sustainable family engagement
2. Create expectations between families and educators
3. Provide opportunities for engagement
4. Ensure the needed resources and efforts for family engagemen
When we say leadership, you may be wondering which leadership team? School level? District
level? Indeed, it is important to talk about the different aspects of leadership in this context.
Leadership refers to both district level and school level authority, each carrying distinct
responsibilities for fostering family engagement. At the district level, leadership should ensure
resources and initiatives to facilitate family engagement. On the school level, leadership shouldt establish initiatives for sustained family engagement, set clear expectations for collaboration
between families and educators and offer opportunities for meaningful engagement.
That being said, the role of educators, staff, and families should not be forgotten. Educators and
staff contribute by actively participating in engagement initiatives, while families also play a vital
role in their commitment to fostering collaborative partnerships.


How Can Leadership Be Involved?
Leadership involvement, such as the principal and administrative team, strengthens family
engagement as a priority by explicitly integrating it into the school’s values, mission, and goals
for each academic year. It is essential to emphasize that leadership is the driving force behind
these policies and decisions, ﬁrmly establishing the framework for effective family
engagement. An example of this proactive approach can be found in South Carolina’s Marion
County School District! 
Marion County School District places “Strengthen Community” as one of their core values,
elaborating on it as, “We view education as a partnership among students, parents, families, and the community." This tangible commitment to collaboration exempliﬁes how leadership
sets the stage for fostering robust family engagement. 
This is further voiced in their Mission Statement:
When creating core values or a mission statement, leadership can include in its evaluation the
values, beliefs, attitudes, skills, and needs of families and educators. With these ﬁndings in
mind, leadership can supply opportunities for relationship building before and throughout the
school year.

Empowering Leadership: Breaking Barriers for Inclusive Family Engagement
When planning for family engagement activities, principals, administrative teams, and others in
leadership positions are the ones who allocate resources such as building space and ﬁnances,
as well as assign roles. As you will learn throughout the rest of this lesson, many families face
barriers to engaging as partners with schools at events. Some of these barriers are adequate
space for meetings, provision for childcare or food, and availability of faculty to staff the event.
Because school leadership is responsible for allocating resources, their support is crucial to
remove these barriers. Go through below to see some practical examples.
Creating standards for educators to meet for family engagement both on and off school property.
Examples: Timelines to call each student’s family during summer and start of school year and to complete
home visits.
Compensating families
Compensation for families on Tier 1 teams or on any leadership team where other participants are within
their employed roles or compensated positions.
Establishing rooms designated for family engagement
Example: Assigning different classrooms as different meeting points, such as Mr. Bartlett's classroom for
9th grade parents, Ms. Jenkins' classroom for 4th grade parents, and the auditorium for schoolwide
meetings.
Creating opportunities for educators to engage with families
Examples: Set days for home visits or off-property visits, and gas compensation.
Setting aside funds and resources for food and transportation
Examples: Buses for picking up families, gas station gift cards for families coming from over a certain
distance away, and a food budget.

Individuals with such a high role of inﬂuence can leverage the abilities of each staff and faculty
member, student, and family to support student outcomes within Tier 1. 
Involving leadership at Tier 1 with family engagement requires both adaptive and technical
leadership.
Adaptive Leadership: “who, what, why” leaders who focus on the big picture, motivation,
and goals.
Technical Leadership: “how and when” leaders who support the procedures necessary to
implement the decided-upon practices (Eagle et al., 2015).
Can you identify a person or group of people who can clearly see a larger vision? What about
individuals who see the short-term step-by-step needs to be met to achieve an overarching
goal? Are you either type? When elevating family engagement, both are needed!
It can be easy to put the "why" and "how" for family engagement into words. It's much more
diffcult to put these practices into action.
Don’t worry. We will see examples of this later on!
A Reminder
It may feel overwhelming to spend signiﬁcant amounts of energy, time, and strategy on
changing or adapting an entire system. Remind yourself and your leaders that a Multi-Tiered
System of Supports (MTSS) is not a destination but a journey that evolves over time. Systematic
change is slow and deliberate. If family engagement is a struggle at your school, do not lose
heart! Each small step is still a step forward. 
!What matters when getting leadership on board is not perfection but
persistence.
Putting signiﬁcant amounts of time, energy, and resources into family engagement can feel like
a big task. Reviewing the beneﬁts for families and students can remind everyone why it matters,
and that's where we're headed now

The Beneffts of Family Engagement, Why Family Engagement Matters for All-Educators, Families, and Students
When families are engaged within a school, it promotes alignment between the two on their
values, expectations, and desires for students. For families with minority backgrounds,
authentic engagement rooted in shared stories leads to more comfort with educators. Engaged
families hold higher aspirations for their children, have better communication with their kids,
and have a more favorable view of their child’s educator (Baker et al., 2016).
Family engagement becomes empowerment; families become more conﬁdent in their own
capabilities to help their children as students and to understand the educational system. They
also gain a better understanding of how they ﬁt in with their child’s education. One study with
keep track
Provide resources to facilitate engagement, such as a
room, food, and transportation via gas station cardsover 50 interviews and focus groups between students, families, and staff, found that family
engagement built capacity in families to help with English-speaking, math, and leadership
skills (Westrich & Strobel, 2013). This beneﬁts teachers too: staff reported an eased workload,
reduced disciplinary issues, and improved school unity, morale, and quality when families were
engaged. Teachers with engaged parents feel more supported in their own work with students. 
Every family, every student, and every educator beneﬁts from family-school engagement at
Tier 1, and having Tier 1 family engagement supports the more specialized engagements at
tiers 2 and 3.

TABLE HERE


You now have a clearer picture of why family engagement matters to everyone — leadership,
educators, staff, families, and students. Let’s brieﬂy review the barriers that make family
engagement diffcult outlined in the image below!


Barriers families and educators face when trying to engage
IMAGE HERE

These are a few of the common barriers that you've most likely already experienced as an
educator. The good news is that we’re here to offer solutions for overcoming these obstacles!
As we pivot to practical strategies to elevate family engagement at Tier 1, let’s ﬁrst frame
ourselves within South Carolina’s Department of Education’s standards for family engagement.


Engaging with Families We Find Diffcult to Engage:
Family engagement would be easy if each educator and each family were motivated to work with
one another as equal partners.
However, we know that isn’t always the case.
Some families and educators resist engagement, and some relationships between educators and
families are fractured.
Signiﬁcant barriers impede engagement for families and educators, and trying to use the same
tools we use with already engaged families won’t be as effective if we don’t speciﬁcally address
the needs of each family. In this section, you are going to look at two types of specialized
engagement:
engaging families that are historically marginalized, ignored, or unreached by the school
engaging families that have a fractured relationship with the school



Engaging with Families Marginalized from the School Community:
Deﬁning a family that proves challenging to involve is signiﬁcant; biases and preconceptions
arise upon encountering terms like "disengaged families," "at-risk families," and
"marginalized families." Bemak and Cornely (2002) draw a line here, separating families
integrated within the school community from those on its periphery. The former are proactive
and vocal, whereas the latter are often seen as historically inaccessible, distant, or removed
from the school.
Let’s be abundantly clear here: this distance is nota character judgment
of the family but the reality of the multifaceted barriers in their way. 

You have already reviewed the common barriers families and educators face when trying to elevate family engagement. Other key barriers are listed below.
1) Low income or unexpected drop in income; personal debt; unemployment
2) Emotional unavailability due to mental health or life experiences; fear of violence
from partner; overwhelmed by childrearing; lack of trust that educators understand
their unique needs
3) Disabilities; alcohol and substance abuse
4) Experiences of racism, sexism, homophobia; discrimination; historically negative
experiences with educational systems
These barriers are not a reﬂection of families' desires or their relationship to their child. We
have to remember what Harper and Mapp said so clearly in 2006:
We have to absolutely believe in our soulsthat families want to support their
children.”
Harper and Mapp, 2006


You are now going over a few commonly experienced methods to engage marginalized families.
Keep the following statement in mind as we look at these strategies: To engage families in a
school context, sometimes you need to respond to their needs outside of the school. Let's start!

1) Food & Transportation–
Families who wrestle with food insecurity can beneﬁt from a program such as “Backpack
Bakers," where families in the district donate canned food and personal hygiene items to be
distributed to school families or students in need within the school. This is also a great way to
engage with community partners such as local businesses or faith-based institutions!
Transportation can be extremely diffcult for families. Use school buses to pick up families for
school-wide events or offer gas gift cards for families. With leadership support, a budget can be
set for transportation costs or standards for cents per mile.
2) Childcare & Time–
Host events that align with what a family would already be doing. For example, dinner typically
occurs between 6:00-8:00 PM. For families with multiple children, leaving certain kids at home
to visit one child’s school can be diffcult in terms of childcare or feeding them. Hosting events
such as a fundraiser or teacher-parent meeting at a local restaurant, such as Chick-ﬁl-A®, Cicis
Pizza™, etc., can be a great middle-ground because the entire family can have dinner while also
being engaged. This can also happen within a school where food is provided by leadership,
catered by a restaurant, or made by families on the school board or PTA.
3) Communication–
Communication ought to be accessible for all. Families that don’t speak English as a ﬁrst
language can especially struggle in school settings. Host events in their ﬁrst language if you have
a prominent number of families with another ﬁrst language and include a translator at school-
wide events. While translators are great, hiring personnel who are bilingual or multilingual can
provide even more comfort to families knowing that their students, as well as themselves, are
connected to a school that has more routine accessibility. You want to avoid using students as
their families’ translator, as this can create confusing roles for them in the situation. Further,
ensure that all signs and paperwork are offered in multiple languages. It may also be helpful to
have bilingual staff greeting families dropping children off.

In addition to incorporating other languages, adapt communication to meet the cultural norms
and practices of families. Some families prefer texting only after school hours with no calls unless
for emergencies. Others want a formal conference instead of an informal conversation and vice
versa. Make sure that interactions are happening with the appropriate family member, such as a
family whose grandmother is signiﬁcantly involved in the student’s education.

Some families may not have access to reliable internet or strong cellular data, limiting their
access to emails texts, or phone calls. Further, notes sent home can be a barrier depending on
literacy levels. To overcome these challenges and prevent frustration over a lack ofcommunication, use physical home visits where communication preferences and needs can be
discussed. This can also be accomplished at school during events. To protect against
forgetfulness and provide expectations for communication, give parents a syllabus at the start of
the semester that includes a communication plan that is signed by both families and students. 
4) Representation–
Families with culturally, racially, or ethnically diverse backgrounds value their representation in
the school setting (Hopper, 2020). This includes positions in staff, faculty, and membership
among leadership teams or focus groups, and at events like International Night.
As previously mentioned, families are more likely to believe that leadership cares about their
stories and background when they are aware that staff and faculty are taking continuing
education courses or workshops on their culture. Hiring diverse staff is not enough in and of
itself; faculty and staff need to be aware of family needs and how to practically respond to them.
For example, a district in Washington places family liaisons at elementary schools in areas with
growing immigrant and refugee families to match that school’s particular needs.
5) Professional Development–
For cultural events and multilingual signs to make an impact, they need to be backed by faculty
and staff who are continuing to grow professionally in their understanding of cultural
responsiveness, equity, and restoration. Support staff in their professional development related
to mindset, skills, and practices regarding family engagement: for example:
self-assessing one’s own identity and culture within the school context
studying the distinction between behavioral challenges and cultural differences
learning conﬂict resolution skills to address cultural differences 
Let families know about the professional development courses and opportunities that are being
offered to staff. This could be in an email with weekly updates, or on the school website. It is key
to match the engagement plans and decisions to the community. In Georgia, for example, a
district with a growing number of Latino/a families provided professional development
regarding English learning and cultural competency. In addition, the district offered workshopswith community experts regarding instructions and engagement practices to match the needs of
diverse families.
6) Information–
The educational system can be extremely intimidating from the outside looking in. The language
of the educational system, the history of education in the United States, and the power imbalance
between families and staff, faculty, and educators are diffcult for many to navigate. To
counteract this dynamic, avoid using jargon in your conversations or signage. Have family
volunteers, staff, or students offer tours of the school building before a schoolyear starts for new
families or parents and caregivers who are interested. On bulletin boards or website pages,
provide information on school resources, where services are available, courses and enrollment,
etc., in clearly marked links or titles and in multiple languages. 

Even if families were educated within the United States, they most likely were not educated at the
same school as their children. If they were educated at the same school, structures and processes
have most likely changed. Parents cannot support their children in education or engage if they do
not understand the process or mechanisms of education. Resources, focus groups, and school
tours that explain the “what” and “why” of education are important to boost family conﬁdence
in engaging with a school (Hopper, 2020). You want caregivers and parents to be able to advocate
for their children; ensure that they are given the tools to do so.
7) Physical Engagement–
Both parties, families and school staff and faculty, can be skeptical of each other. Bridging that
gap requires intentional engagement. For a start, a “windshield assessment” can be conducted by
staff, like one project conducted by Blitz et al. (2013). Physically driving through the community
and evaluating visible signs of strengths and needs increased educators' familiarity with their
students' background. Community members were engaged through conversations to discuss
their own perceptions of their community and the school. In terms of increasing families’
familiarity with schools, the aforementioned school tours can do this, as can a video tour to share
with families if they’re unable to come physically.
8) Programs & Focus Groups–
The resources offered by schools should match the community's want s or needs. Families can be
brought together to discuss educational barriers they see between themselves and their student,
their needs, and their understanding of where the student stands with the school. This discussion
ought to be facilitated by school counselors or family liaisons while teachers are present. Further,
when preparing a focus group or meeting of any length, take input from families about what days
and duration of time work for them. 

As previously mentioned, removing transportation, food, and childcare barriers is the
infrastructure behind these meetings and focus groups. Marginalized communities have a history
of being let down by institutions or organizations that claim to help them. To establish trust and
respect, break the cycle of offering words instead of action, and ensure that the suggestions,
input, and feedback from families are taken seriously and implemented within schools through
tangible ways.
Here are a few ideas for potentially relevant programs your school can offer in response to the
barriers or needs some marginalized families have outlined: 
a) Financial Aid Night where families can come ﬁll out ﬁnancially related forms, learn about
ﬁnancial literacy, and speak to ﬁnancial advisors or experts. 
b) Parent University where families can have access to learning about their students’
education, preparation for college applications; families and students on committees
(Gulledge, 2021). 
c) Monthly Saturday workshops where relevant topics in the community (e.g., an upcoming
election) or general topics that connect schools and families (e.g., an open forum discussing
how a middle school can better prepare students for the transition to high school).
9)Support Family's Relationship to Their Students–
Many families feel underprepared to support their children with homework, especially as
children get older. Language can be a barrier, as can understanding what educators want from an
assignment. Sending home content-speciﬁc resources, videos, pamphlets, and clear instructions
can mitigate the confusion caused by homework. Further, receiving parents’ feedback on their
ability to help their students with homework can increase participation and encourage
collaboration.These are simply overview examples of equitable and culturally responsive practices that work
to move families that are marginalized into families that are integrated into our schools. You can
most likely think of strategies you or your school are already using that weren't listed here!

Engaging with Families in Rural Areas:
You’ve reviewed a lot of strategies today. You may be, understandably, thinking: "How does this
even work practically? What does it actually look like?" Those questions make sense. The work
we've described is both broad and speciﬁc and can feel like a tall order. As both a motivator that
this work is possible and a practical example of what the work looks like, we're going to go
through strategies used in a research study on family engagement.
This study, conducted by Lisa Blitz and their team in 2013, was chosen for a reason: it focused
on elevating engagement in rural areas, a challenge many school districts (potentially your
own!) face in South Carolina. 
Let's review some facts about rurality in South Carolina.
IMAGE HERE
Information about rural areas in South Carolina
How do educators and school staff care for, connect with, and uplift families and students in
rural communities through family engagement?
The starting point involves self-education.
While poverty is a challenge no matter what geographical area you live in, it is prominent in
South Carolina’s rural areas, as you may have noticed from the graphic. While you are going to
learn more about poverty as a stressor in the lesson on wellness enhancement, for now, we are
going to go through a poverty simulation, SPENT, hosted by Urban Ministries of Durham, a
homeless ministry. 
Click on the following link to start!
SPENT
Urban Ministries of Durham serves over 6000 people every year who struggle
with poverty and homelessness. Spent is an interactive game created by
McKinney that challenges you to manage your money, raise a child and make it
through the month getting paid minimum wage after a stretch of
unemployment.
READ MORE PLAYSPENT 
We want to acknowledge that you may be familiar with poverty already. You may have lived
through it, come from a family history of it, or seen loved ones struggle. Even if you’ve never
experienced poverty yourself or in your close circles, you probably have a good idea of how
poverty impacts students. We want to validate those experiences! This simulation is simply
another perspective to consider.
As we said earlier, we are walking through this example
as a motivator that everything we've discussed in this
lesson can be done! Let's get into it!
“Prevention through Collaboration: Family Engagement
with Rural Schools Experiencing Poverty" Blitz et. al 2013
The article "Prevention through Collaboration: Family Engagement with Rural Schools and
Families Living in Poverty" emphasizes the importance of collaboration between schools and
families to support children living in poverty in rural areas. The authors suggest several effective
strategies that can be used to support families experiencing poverty.
a) Creating a welcoming and supportive environment: Schools can create a warm and
welcoming atmosphere that makes families feel valued and included. This can be
achieved through initiatives such as parent-teacher conferences, family events, and
other forms of outreach.
b) Building relationships: Schools can encourage parents and
caregivers to build positive relationships with teachers and
other school staff. This can foster trust and open lines of
communication, which can be particularly helpful when
addressing sensitive issues such as academic struggles.
c) Encouraging parent and caregiver involvement: Schools can provide opportunities
for parents to become more involved in their children's education, such as
volunteering in the classroom, attending school events, and joining parent-teacher
associations.
d) Advocating for families: Schools can help families access resources and support
services, such as tutoring, counseling, and healthcare. They can also advocate for
policies and programs that beneﬁt families living in poverty.
e) Providing targeted interventions: Schools can provide targeted interventions that
address the speciﬁc needs of children living in poverty. For example, they can offer
afterschool programs that provide homework help, tutoring, and enrichment
activities.
Overall, the article emphasizes that collaboration and partnership between schools and families
can be a powerful tool for supporting children living in poverty in rural areas. By working
together, schools and families can help to prevent academic struggles, reduce risky behaviors,
and promote positive outcomes for children.
Let's expand on the generalized strategy bullets above by looking
at practical examples for each element. Be sure to congratulate
yourself for the strategies you are already applying!
1) Welcoming and supportive Enviornment: Schools can host family events such as back-to-school nights,
open houses, and community dinners to build relationships with families. Schools can also
implement programs to welcome new families, such as home or community center
visits or personalized welcome packets.
2) Building Relationship: Teachers can reach out to families through phone calls, emails, or in-person meetings to discuss their child's progress or address any concerns. Schools can also establish a family liaison or parent coordinator position to help build connections between families and the school. 
3) Encouraging caregiver involvement: Schools can offer a variety of opportunities for parent involvement, such as parent-teacher conferences, volunteer opportunities, and school decision-making committees. They can also provide resources for families to help support their children's learning at home, such as book lists, reading tips, and educational websites. 
4) Advocating for families: Schools can help families access resources in the community, such as food pantries, healthcare clinics, and job training programs. They can also advocate for policies and programs that benefit families living in poverty, such as increased funding for school behavioral health resources and services or expanded access to pre-K programs. 
5) Targated Interventions: targeted interventions: Schools can offer targeted interventions to address the specific needs of children living in poverty, such as summer learning programs, afterschool tutoring, and mentorship programs. They can also provide resources for families, such as financial literacy classes, parenting workshops, and mental health services.  We will talk more about these targeted interventions in your next course "Reeling in the Supports with Tier 2"
Throughout the case study partnership with rural schools, a
provide resources for families,
number of methods were used by the research team to support
the recommended strategies, including "Parent Leadership
classes parenting workshops
Training Courses (PLTC)". Let's review a few more practical
strategies.
such as ffnancial literacy
a) Parent Leadership Training Course (PLTC) –
The PLTC is a program designed to empower parents to become more involved in their child's
education by providing them with the skills and knowledge needed to be effective advocates for
their children.
b) Financial literacy classes –
Schools can offer ﬁnancial literacy classes to help families better manage their ﬁnances and
navigate economic challenges.
c) Family liaisons or parent coordinators –
Blitz et.al (2013) recommend that schools establish a family liaison or parent coordinator
position to help build connections between families and the school and provide support to families in accessing resources and services.

These practical examples of applying strategies in a rural community is a reminder that you may
be bored of hearing at this point but cannot be overstated: The strategies and tools implemented
to engage families ought to be tailored to the needs of the families in your community. There is
no textbook plan or “sure ﬁre” way to elevate engagement with all families immediately. As
demonstrated by Blitz et al. (2013), elevating family engagement in diffcult to reach groups
takes time, patience, intentionality, and support. And—it is beyond worth it.
Family engagement is family empowerment, as seen in the graduates of the parent leadership
training course. 
"It was the first time any of the parents had graduated from any type
of course or training, and they were bursting with pride."
And this empowerment leads to actual change with real impact. A story told by one of the
mothers in Blitz's study demonstrates this beautifully:
IMAGE HERE
A quote from Blitz et al. (2013)
Up until now, we’ve focused primarily on initiating engagement with families. We’re going to
pivot now to restoring engagement with families when a relationship has been fractured.
Knowledge Check

Restoring Relationships with Families
Rebuilding Bridges: Strategies for Restoring Relationships with
Families in Education
For the majority of the students in a teacher’s classroom, their relationship to one another is
established and maintained through more straightforward means: a smile at the door with a
greeting, asking about their weekend, and checking-in on them before and after large
assignments. The same goes for most student’s families—educators maintain the relationship
through a quick email, handshakes and hugs on back-to-school nights, and hallway chats
during student performances. For a certain percentage, however, the relationship between
student, family, and teacher needs restoration.
a) These relationships are characterized by “giving up:”
Teachers have given up on engaging with families or the student. For families that
are stigmatized or ostracized, teachers may be pressured to disengage or partake in
discussing the families in a negative light.
b) The student has given up on trying and on feeling heard.
c) Families have given up on a relationship with their student’s teacher or even with
the student themselves.
How do we overcome the frustration and stigma to get these families
and their student the help they need?
The answer comes in restorative practices.
While many schools are trained in restorative practices, the training can vary signiﬁcantly.
When we say, “restorative practices,” we are referring to a broader version than you may be
familiar with. 
Restorative practices are the strategies used to repair relationships between everyone in the
school setting—between teachers, staff, students, families, and faculty.
While this may include juvenile justice, it expands beyond those involved in the criminal justice
system to everyone connected to your school, including families. You, understandably, might be
thinking:
If a family simply doesn’t want to engage, or has been hurt by a school and no
longer wants to be near a school representative, how in the worldam I going to get
them involved in restorative practices?
We hear you. This is hard work, and results don’t come immediately. Remind yourself that you
are not responsible for the actions of another; you cannot make a family do or stop something.
All you can do is your best, what you’re asked to do.
Let's review some practical strategies you can use.

Restoration Strategies
Practically restoring relationships takes time, patience, and humility. There are a variety of
frameworks used for restorative practices, such as the Five R’s of Restorative Justice:
-relationship
-respect
-responsibility
-repair
-reintegration
See the attached article from the Conffict Center that
gives a deeper analysis of the Five R’s!
The 5 R's of Restorative Justice - Conffict Center
A great way to understand the Restorative Justice Community Group Conference
process is to look at it through the lens of the 5 R's: Relationship, Respect,
Responsibility, Repair, and Reintegration (credited to Beverly Title, founder of
Resolutionaries). Read the restorative practices overview or skip to the 5 R's
below!
READ MORE CONFLICT CENTER 

Establish-Maintain-Restore
A framework developed speciﬁcally for schools is the Establish-Maintain-Restore framework,
also known as the Equity Explicit Establish-Maintain-Restore (EE-EMR) framework. While
originally designed for student-educator relationships (Cook et al., 2018; Gaias et al., 2020), the
Equity Explicit Establish-Main-Restore (EE-EMR) framework provides extremely helpful
guidelines for restoring family-educator relationships.
You are going to brieﬂy look at practical strategies to establish, maintain, and restore
relationships between families and educators. You will go much more in depth on Establish-
Maintain-Restore in the lesson on school climate! 
TABLE HERE
Like we said earlier, we know this is hard work. Here are
a few more resources to help support your efforts! They
cover restorative practices, as well as Conffict
Resolution Education (CRE).

Resources for Teachers
Resources for Teachers This section of the site is focused on providing practical
information and resources that teachers, teachers-in-training and teachers-
of-teachers will ﬁnd useful. Use the sidebar menu to explore speciﬁc areas of
CRE practice . Here's a few activities for classroom use that can help infuse
conﬂict resolution ideas into the learning environment.
School Resources
Quick guide on making school climate improvements (U.S. Department of
Education) Fostering healthy relationships and promoting positive discipline in
schools (Schott Foundation's National Opportunity to Learn Campaign) How
can we ﬁx school discipline toolkit (Fix School Discipline) Visit the Fix School
Discipline website and download resources for educators and the community,
as well as the mini toolkit.
As you push through the challenge, remind yourself that your progress can be exponential.
Families talk to one another. Making inroads with one caregiver can very well inﬂuence the
families in that caregiver’s social circle as they share their experiences with one another.
By focusing on families that may be challenging to engage because of their speciﬁc, intensive
needs, we prepare a foundation for better staff, family, student and school climate outcomes! As
you work through the next lesson on school climate and safety, think through the role of family
engagement in improving them.
You have spent a lot of time reviewing strategies to elevate or restore family engagement. Let’s
work through a scenario together before moving into the summary!

IMAGE HERE First day of school case study
IMAGE HERE Jaden's Story


Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
1) Leadership support in family engagement is crucial; leadership can elevate family
engagement by setting aside resources (e.g., money, time, space), creating
opportunities for family engagement (e.g., calendar dates for events, professional
development), and explicitly including family engagement as a core value in their
mission statement or vision.
2) There are a multitude of barriers between schools and families that hinder
engagement. Some of the ones were: transportation diffculties, scheduling,
distrust of school systems, non-English speaking as a ﬁrst language, and having
children in different grades across different schools.
3) Certain families struggle with family engagement more than
others. You learned about engaging with families on the
outskirts, using many of the strategies that were previously
discussed but with a different mindset.
4) Restoring relationships through the EE-EMR framework involves the same
humility and patience needed to engage with all families, just in a different setting.
Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways

@@@@@
Lesson 3 of 3
Elevating Engagement in Practical Ways
Outcomes:
1. Translate theoretical concepts into practical strategies that foster strong partnerships
between schools and families
2. Explore the principles and strategies of family engagement within the context of South
Carolina's education system
3. Feel equipped to implement plans for elevating family engagement in line with South
Carolina's K-12 Framework's ﬁve strategies for building relationships, communication,
linking families to learning outcomes, collaborative practices, and community
partnership
Elevating Family Engagement
From Theory to Action in Elevating Family Engagement
As you continue to explore the realm of family engagement, we, the SBHA, build upon the
foundational understanding established in the previous lesson, Elevating Family and Student
Engagement. In the prior lesson, you learned about the critical role of leadership support in
driving strategies to enhance outcomes for staff, families, and students. You also gained an
understanding of the importance of honing our ability to engage with historically marginalized
or less-involved families and students, along with learning the art of reestablishing
relationships with families. With this essential groundwork part in place, you will now shift
from theoretical foundations to practical implementation. In this lesson, the focus turns to
family engagement within our state, South Carolina. You will closely examine the state’s Family
Engagement K–12 Framework and its strategies that serve as the foundation for effective family
engagement plans. Through exploring these practical approaches, the aim is to bridge theory
with action, equipping you with actionable insights to elevate family engagement in ways that
truly matter.
Before starting this lesson, a gentle reminder that family engagement, in all of its diffculties
and intricacies, is one of the most worthwhile efforts we can make as educators and change-
makers in our school systems. 
Let this following quote from the National Parent Teacher Association Standards for
Parent/Family Involvement (2010, p.17) be a reminder as you continue on this lesson.
"Effectively engaging parents and families in the education of their
children has the potential to be far more transformational than any other
type of education reform.” 
National Parent Teacher Association Standards for Parent/Family Involvement

Family Engagement in South Carolina
South Carolina Family Engagement K–12 Framework
As you may recall from Core MTSS Practices, there is legislation in place to support family
engagement —Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and the Individuals with Disabilities in
Education Act (IDEA). 
In addition, South Carolina has speciﬁc legislation that aims to support family and school
engagement. Examples are the SC Code of Laws Title 59, Chapter 28; the South Carolina School
Improvement Council, and the South Carolina Annual Parent Survey. 
See the attached PDFs below for more information.
Every Student Succeeds Act.pdf
Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act.pdf
Family Engagement Supports and Resources- South Carolina.pdf

South Carolina K–12 Framework
One of those supports is the South Carolina Family Engagement K–12 Framework (SC K–12
Framework; 2019). This was developed in line with the Title 59 mandate with help from the
Council of Chief State School Offcers. The purpose of the Framework is to provide action steps
and strategies to ground family engagement policies and practices at each level: state, district,
and school.
There are ﬁve strategies in the SC K-12 Framework that are the anchors for practical family
engagement plans. Let’s brieﬂy look at those now. We will get more in-depth later on!
Think of these as the instruction manuals behind each tool or practical strategy we will use to
build our Tier 1 supports.
Building Relationships –
Mutual trust and respect between schools and families; valuing the diversity of each other; the
ability to communicate clearly and listen actively and share information on students’ academics,
behavior, and positive health and wellbeing.
Communication –
Effectively conveying and understanding information between schools and advocates; two-way
communication that uses multiple strategies to build relationships between schools and families.
Linking Learning Outcomes –
Keeping families knowledgeable about what their students are learning and about their role in
supporting students in achieving goals; providing strong school supports for family engagement
and ensuring that families are aware of them. 
Collaborative Practices –
Staff and families learning with and from each other; viewing each individual through an assets-
based lens; working together and sharing information to achieve outcomes not achievable in
isolation.
Community Partnerships –
Mutual commitments with community organizations (businesses, recreational centers, faith-
based organizations, volunteer groups, healthcare organizations, higher education) that engage
families in ways that are relevant and suitable for everyone involved.
These are the ﬁve overarching strategies that practical steps for elevating family engagement
will fall under. You learned the beneﬁts of family engagement for students, and you’ve already
seen the theories, such as dual capacity building theory, behind this in Core MTSS. We now have
these strategies to guide our thinking and planning.
Moving from theory and ideals to a systematic, intentional integration of families with a
collaborative partnership requires practical strategy and ideas. That is what we are going to
cover next!

Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways
Practical Strategies for Building Relationships
You will notice an overlap between practical plans under each strategy; this is due to the
interlocking nature of these strategies! After all, you can’t build relationships without
communication—and building relationships is where we start!
Before you review practical strategies to elevate family engagement, we want to acknowledge
the work that you are already doing. It can feel, at times, overwhelming or even insulting to
suggest adding on activities that are completed outside of work hours or are simply another
"thing" tacked on to an already over-full plate. 
We hear you! These strategies are not meant to say, "You're not doing enough" or "Add this on
top of everything". These are practical tools you can choose to use in line with the MTSS
framework. 
As you review these tools, know that it might take scheduling creatively, meeting with your
grade-level team, or reaching out to your social worker, school counselor, or School Behavioral
Health Academy coach. You are NOT alone, and we are here for you! 

Building Relationships
Relationships are built as much on tiny, day-to-day interactions as they are on set-aside,
planned events, and meetings. Strategies to build relationships require both! Let’s look at the
day-to-day moments ﬁrst. This includes both body language and verbal affrmation. While
these strategies may seem mundane or even obvious, they are important because we experience
them in every relationship.
Day-to-Day –
-Smile when you see parents and caregivers.
-Learn parents' and caregivers' names! Use this opportunity to connect with students. Ask
them what their parents prefer to be called or what most people call their parents— by their
ﬁrst name? Last? If their name is associated with a title, such as Dr. or Reverend, do they
prefer that? It is best to assume formality until the family advises otherwise.
-Smile at the student while talking to their caregivers so that the child knows that they are
included and valued in the conversation.
-Celebrate parents and caregivers. Thank them for what they do. This can be in a day-to-day
interaction verbally when they’re picking their student up or dropping them off, or more
intentionally, such as in a section printed in the school newspaper or an email.

Intentional ways to build relationships aren't just meetings, formal or informal. This is where
communication overlaps: intentional ways of building relationships include what you say and
how. You'll see examples of settings, statements, and more in the next section!
Intentional Settings –
1) During one of your ﬁrst meetings, declare your intentions to the caregiver or parent. For
example, say, "I want to partner with you," or "I look forward to working alongside you,"
and so forth. Use language that communicates an equal partnership and collaboration
between you and the family for the student. 
2) If the family speaks another language as their primary language, ﬁnd an interpreter or staff
member who is bilingual. 
3) Ask questions about the student outside of school, such as what their favorite activity is, or
who other important people are in their lives. You’re showing the family that you care about
their student beyond what occurs within school walls. 
4) Explain the rationale behind what you’re doing. Remember, we don't know what we don't
know. Instead of referencing what you’re doing with educational system jargon or
acronyms, explain what you're doing and why you're doing it using references to their
speciﬁc student.
5) Share every success. Let families know how their students are doing and what they’re doing
well in, academically, behaviorally, and in their positive health and wellbeing. 
6) Give parents opportunities to volunteer in class and in school. Schools have open-door
policies where families can come observe their child’s class; make sure parents know about
this! You can use online calendars where weekly or monthly slots are available for meeting
with the teacher, visiting school, etc. 
7) Hold parent meetings early in the school year, within the ﬁrst month if possible. Use an
online signup sheet so families can ﬁnd a time that works for their schedules. During these
meetings, focus on personal connections such as shared backgrounds, hobbies, and hopes
for the student. Explain plans for communication and ask for family communication
preferences and expectations. 
You are now going to zoom in on one intentional setting in particular: home visits.
While schools may not frequently engage in home visits as a common practice, it's
important to be mindful that the concept of home visits is a valuable approach to family
engagement. Despite its limited prevalence, understanding the potential beneffts and
strategies linked with home visits can broaden your perspective on fostering stronger
connections between educators and families.

Home Visits
You are going to walk through two different scenarios of how home visits can go. Let's start
with Elizabeth, a 3rd grade teacher, meeting Elena, the mother of her student Yasmine.
 Start of Scenario
Home Visits: Friend or Foe?
Elizabeth has never met Yasmine's mom before. She's in the
apartment complex parking lot getting ready to walk to the
apartment. Let's drop in on Elizabeth and Elena as they get ready.
It's 5:45 PM. School got out a couple hours ago, but I stayed late
to grade so that I wouldn't be too far behind because of this visit.
Meeting these home visit quotas is hard!
My administrator just assumes I know what I'm doing, but I
don't. And all this gas is expensive. Even though I've asked my
colleagues about what to say, I still feel unsure of what to do.
I should probably bring my tote with the resources, pamphlets,
and notes I brought just in case Yasmine's parents have
questions. This is for them, after all, and I hope it helps them
trust us more.
I'll try to make this quick. I don't want to be here, and I am sure
they don't want me here either. They won't mind if we're a bit
brief.
I got back from work 15 minutes ago, and I'm supposed to have
these two teachers in my home? I've barely had time to
straighten up, much less get ready or fix food. I wish we met in
the park.
I feel like a bad hostess. I don't want them to judge me. I saw two
of them get out of the car; do they think they're unsafe here? And
why do they have so much stuff — are they taking notes on this?
Are they going to report on how my house is, what Yasmine's
room looks like? We usually eat dinner at 6:15; what if Yasmine
starts fussing and they think I'm a bad mom?
I feel intimidated and worried. I hope it's fast, but I hope they're
nice and empathetic. I don't know. I've never done this before.
 End of Scenario
You can probably imagine how the rest of that visit went. Both Elizabeth and Elena were
stressed, tired, and didn't know what to expect. They felt unprepared and seemed unsure of the visit's purpose.

Let's now meet Christian, a teacher from the local middle school, visiting Jerome's home to
meet his caregiver, Liam.
Start of Scenario
Home Visits: Friend or Foe?
Christian is on his way to meet Liam and George, the parents of
his student Jerome. Let's see how Christian and George are
getting ready for the visit.
It's 5:45 PM; even though this is later than I usually work, I am
really grateful that my principal made these visits voluntary and
paid for gas. I'm also grateful for the paid training on Saturday.
I wouldn't have thought that they might be concerned that I'm
evaluating their home, or that I have an issue with Jerome. I'm
glad I got the chance to explain in those emails and phone call!
I'll leave the folders in the car just to make it clear that I'm only
here to get to know them better! Jerome told me they usually eat
at 6:30, so I'll leave before then so they have time as a family.
While I am unsure of how this will actually go, I really appreciate
how Christian clarified what the purpose of this visit is and that
we, with Jerome, got to decide if we wanted to do this.
Liam, my partner, and I have really wanted to engage more with
Jerome's new middle school, but we've been really busy with new
jobs and we don't feel super comfortable in school buildings.
Meeting here feels more comfortable for Liam and me, and I
really value that flexibility. Since I know exactly who is coming
and why, I feel less stressed than I did when I first heard about it.
I'm excited for Christian to get to know us better, and for us to
get to know Jerome's teachers. I think this could be the start of an
awesome relationship with the school.
 End of Scenario
Christian's visit to Liam and George was distinctly
different from Elizabeth and Miller's visit to Elena and Marcus.
Why?Was Christian just a better teacher, or
Liam and George "better" parents? As you examine
home visits, you will answer those questions!

Challenges of Home Visits
As you saw with Christian, home visits give educators a way to build relationships with families
outside school and gain insight into family dynamics, culture, and relationships. Research
reveals the value of home visits in improving family-educator relationships (Soule & Curtis,
2021; Stetson et al., 2012), beneﬁtting student outcomes (Sheldon & Jung, 2018; Soule & Curtis,
2021; Wright et al., 2018), and removing certain barriers (e.g., intimidation of school grounds,
transportation issues, childcare; Gulledge, 2021; Hopper, 2020; Jacques & Villegas, 2018).
However, home visits can also be intimidating to families or frightening. This was clear with
Elizabeth and Elena! Educators coming into the home may give families a fear similar to a child
welfare visit or a housing inspection. Having educators or staff visit a family’s most personal
space can feel intrusive, or stressful as social norms dictate a level of hospitality that adds extra
work to a family’s plate. Further, the way educators or staff react in a home setting (e.g.,
nervous, defensive, overly comfortable) can be insulting or off-putting to families. On the
educator side, suggesting that educators add another task that is so time-consuming and
intensive can feel detached from the reality of what teachers are already doing. 
Review these following guidelines to learn more about
conducting family visits, regardless of where they
happen!
IMAGE HERE
Standards for conducting home visits and reminders
"The goal of home visits is to learn from families, not teach
families."
Paulick et al. (2023)
Before moving into communication, let's listen to Marcus Jackson, an executive consultant for
the San Diego County Offce of Education, as he discusses building relationships with families,
provides practical steps, and outlines his own strategy for engaging families, regardless of the
setting!
Marcus beautifully describes the "triangular process" between schools, communities, and
families while giving practical strategies to implement for family engagement. While Marcus
brieﬂy touches on working with diffcult relationships between schools and families, you will
dive into that more thoroughly toward the end of the lesson!

Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways
Practical Strategies for Communication
You’ve most likely noticed the threads of the next key strategy communication already. Let’s
dive deeper into practical ways you can communicate with families to elevate their engagement!
Any house built by a team that cannot communicate with each other is a house destined to fall.
Communication is key for relationships, effectiveness, and simply getting it
done.
The issue with communication between families and schools is not that it cannot happen, but
how it happens.
- Does it provide families with opportunities to share their feedback and
actively participate in the conversation?
- Is it peppered inconsistently throughout weeks and happening only
when a need arises?
- Or is it radio silence for the most part?
This is what Marcus Jackson meant when he talked about talking with parents instead of at
them. Here are key strategies you can use to communicate more effectively with families!
1) Communicate often and in various forms: Consistent, dependable communication is the bedrock of two-way communication. Multiple methods of communication are needed: families value forms such as newsletters, texting, emails, and in-person communication. Communication can occur in groups (e.g., focus groups, parent-teacher conferences, etc.) or individually (e.g., phone calls, home visits, emails).  
2) Make a positive home phone call: Positive home phone calls early or towards the middle of the school year are your opportunity to learn more about the student and their family. It’s important to ensure that your first communication with a family is not over a negative issue, whether a low grade or a behavioral complication. These calls also allow you to share with caregivers your own positive experiences with the student. If you have a smaller classroom, you may be able to make phone calls to every student’s family. If that is not feasible, you can make positive phone calls to families of students who seem to be struggling, are new, or are receiving Tier 2 or Tier 3 supports. 
3) Have a translator: Have a translator: According to the South Carolina Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office, 7.3% of South Carolinian families speak a language other than English in the home. While that may seem like a small percentage, that’s over 300,000 people! Families that speak a language other than English deserve to be known and seen in ways that work for them. Families who speak languages other than English deserve to be respected and understood. The availability of bilingual staff and translators demonstrates a commitment to an inclusive and welcoming school environment.
4) Use Inclusive language: It is easy to slip into assumptions about family structure or what we expect a student’s family to be like. Yet, we know that many families are not a “typical nuclear” family. Caregivers may be biological or adoptive, married or single, homosexual or heterosexual — and any combination of this! Students may be in foster care, living with grandparents, or have a single parent. Ask open-ended questions to your students about their families to get a better understanding.  

Outside of speciﬁc plans like having a translator or using inclusive language, much of
communication comes down to simply being a conversationalist. Watch Celeste Headlee, a
journalist and radio show-host, go over ten ways to have a better conversation during a 2016
TED Talk in Savannah, Georgia.
Celeste Headlee: 10 ways to have a better conversation | TED
You just listened to Celeste Headlee offering invaluable insights into the art of conversation. Her
practical tips and thoughtful advice serve as a guide to enhancing our everyday interactions.
These principles help you cultivate more meaningful connections, foster understanding, and
bridge divides in a world where effective communication is more crucial than ever.
Celeste Headlee's tips are great for in-person communication, and some of them apply to
communicating through technology. Given how ubiquitous technology is, you are going to
dedicate more time to examining communication through technology with families.

Communicating Through Technology
While not accessible to or preferable for every family, technology-based communication is a
staple in many schools and provides a level of effectiveness and ease for communicating.
Technology can be used to contact parents at a time when they’re accessible but not on school
grounds and can be used in a variety of methods: short emails, newsletters, website updates,
texts, calls, and more. At the beginning of the school year, consider creating and sharing a brief,
informal online survey where families can share a bit about themselves as well as select their
preferred method of communication and speciﬁc times of day they’re available! 
Research shows that caregivers are especially interested in technology-based communication
that allows them to respond or give feedback instead of simply reading what the educator has to
say (Ketly & Waydashi, 2022). This further creates a feeling of equitable partnership. There are a
few apps and processes used for communication in schools that you may be familiar with
already. Let’s brieﬂy look at those now to boost your communication with families online!
1) REMIND APP:This is an app for educators to text students and families with reminders, motivational messages,
and homework updates. It allows the educator to set offce hours so parents can connect with the
educator and discuss what’s on their mind. This is a two-way app; families can send the educator
voice notes and permission slips as well! 
2) CLASROOM WEBSITE: Educators can put every resource required for their classroom in one place for families and
students to easily access; here, educators can post class updates, photos, and reminders. A
classroom website weeds out the overwhelming number of emails with attachments being sent.
There are multiple different website building tools:
-Wix
-WordPress
-HubSpot Drag-and-Drop Website Builder
-Mozello
-Weebly
These are free, and there are plenty of others that you can pay to get help setting up a website! If
you have a high school classroom, creating or editing a classroom website can be an assignment!
3) BLOOMZ APP: Bloomz is a hybrid between a messaging app and a classroom website! Parents connect to the
educator as well as to other parents. Class updates allow for video and photo sharing, and the
calendar has itemized events that link to other pages. Educators can send messages about student
timelines and behavior, and the app has more of a social networking feel because parents can like
and respond to statuses. 
4) SLIDESHOW: This is a strategy that works best with families of younger students. With the families’ permission,
you can take pictures during class and create little slideshows to send to parents throughout the
year to see what their students are learning and doing! Parents can also make one for educators to
show the student’s life outside of school. 
Given that the majority of family and school communication comes from schools to families, it
is important to respond promptly to communication from families. Whether your own
availability is outlined in the class's syllabus, or communicated one-on-one, dedicate time in
your schedule to respond to families. One principal set up a system with his secretary where he
would respond to every phone call from a parent by the end of the day (Leo et al., 2019). When
parents ﬁrst call, the secretary would inform them that the principal would call them back after
3 PM. Plans like these increase trust between families and schools when they are followed
through with consistency!
As you move forward into the next strategy, keep this following quote in mind when you reﬂect
on communication!
“The two words 'information' and 'communication' are often used
interchangeably, but they signify quite different things:
Information is giving out; communication is getting through.”
- Sydney J. Harris, American Journalist

Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways
Practical Strategies for Linking Families to Learning Outcomes
Families need to know their role in their student’s success. Bringing families into the
educational process and academic career of their students takes time. In many ways, the
process of including families is less deﬁned than strategies to build relationships or
communicate because learning outcomes are so diverse.
Let’s listen to Dr. Karen Mapp, the creator of the Dual Capacity Building Framework for Family-
School Partnerships that you may have learned about already if you took the Core MTSS
Practices. In this clip, Dr. Mapp gives a talk at the Harvard Graduate School of Education on the
purpose of linking families to learning.
VIDEO HERE
Dr. Mapp clearly laid out the value of linking families to learning outcomes. And, as you already
know, you’ll encounter students with different learning outcomes in the same class, and
families with their own expectations and desires for a student that may or may not align with
yours! You'll likely encounter more parents than not who don’t know how to engage with their
student’s learning outcomes.
Use the following tips to link families to their student's
learning outcomes!
Tip 1: Let Parents Know How They Can Help
Tell parents about volunteering opportunities or let them know they can observe their
child’s class at any time! Give speciﬁc feedback to parents on how they can help their
students. This includes offering parents course-speciﬁc content, educational videos, and
other resources they can use to brush up on a topic they may not have touched on in years. 
Tip 2: Be Specific
VIDEO HERE
This is a video of an academic parent-teacher team meeting, a model for family engagement
created by Maria C. Paredes, where the ﬁrst-grade teacher provides speciﬁc tools families
can use to help their students at home with homework.
Here are more speciﬁc examples. “You can help Colby with his math homework by asking
him to explain how he reached his solution," or "You can help Jessica with her English
homework by having her read aloud what she’s written!”
Speciﬁc instructions are helpful for families of young students and older students alike.
Families may not able to explain sounding out consonants, the War of 1812, or algebraic
division without a refresher themselves. Through the parent’s preferred method of
communication, include an, "Ask Me About..." In this section, you can describe a few of the
topics being covered in class, especially topics students may ﬁnd challenging. This will equip
families to support continued learning outside the school. Include real-world connections,
like connecting the value of learning history to the present and practical usages of math in
day-to-day life.
Tip 3: Receive Feedback from Families on Homework
For younger students, having a parent helping them with homework is beneﬁcial if the
parents are positive about engaging with the material. Parents are more likely to be positive if
the work is not extremely long or taxing (Bachman et al., 2021). While you are the expert as a
teacher, families are able to provide valuable feedback on how the material is being processed
and understood by their children. By seeking feedback on assignments, you communicate to
families that you value their engagement with the material. After all, they cannot give input
on an assignment if they have not engaged with it in the ﬁrst place. 
Tip 4: Actively Work to Remove Obstacles that Prevent Families from Engaging
Families want to join their students. However, there are signiﬁcant barriers that prevent
families from coming to school. Events typically occur during evenings, when families would
be returning from or going to work, feeding children, or watching younger and older
children. Remove barriers by offering food and drinks to families at events and ensuring that
food is available for people with certain diet restrictions. Many families have more than one
child; arrange childcare by having educators available to supervise play or host students at
the same time as family workshops or meetings. Travel can be expensive— offer gas gift
cards! 
Ultimately, you cannot fully connect each family to their student’s learning outcomes on your
own. You also can’t be an expert on everything, and you shouldn’t be!
What you need to be is a broker of resources. Have resources ready when parents come to you
for help regarding their student—tutors, school counselors, other staff who may be more
qualiﬁed, programs, and even other families. Here are a few you can use! We've provided South
Carolina's K-12 Framework and the South Carolina Proﬁle of a Graduate.
SCDE Family Engagement K-12 Framework.pdf
329 KB
Proffle of the South Carolina Graduate.pdf
195.3 KB
You also have access to Dr. Karen Mapp's video and the Academic Parent Teacher Team video!

Elevating Family Engagement in Practical Ways
Practical Strategies for Collaborative Practices
Vanilla Ice may have said it best, "Collaborate and Listen!"
Collaboration is active engagement with one another, built on trust, open communication, and
mutual respect. It involves shared responsibility for student outcomes and active participation
by both families and schools in meeting those outcomes. Griffths et al. (2021) deﬁnes shared
responsibility and active participation in the educational context as:
- Shared Responsibility: each member contributes their own expertise and has a
unique role in determining solutions and strategies. In shared responsibility,
ownership is collective, roles are clear, and responsibilities are outlined.
- Active Participation: Each member takes responsibility for their role and contributes
resources. 
Together, shared responsibility and active participation create shared decision-making: teams
systematically take input from all members before making a decision.
School leaders support initiatives to bring families, faculty, and staff together so they can learn
from each other. Both families and schools are viewed through an asset-based lens: What do
you bring to the table? What does that caregiver bring to the table? When both parties are viewed
through an asset-based lens, the "I tell, you do" moves towards “we” statements. 
Let’s look at four examples of schools that collaborated with families to elevate family
engagement. 
Principal Zavala –
On a Saturday, Principal Zavala, the principal of a primarily immigrant, Latino/a and low-
achieving school, hosted a school-sponsored event for families. Caregivers brought their children
to school where educators watched them through supervised sports or playing. While the
children were supervised, caregivers picked two out of ﬁfteen workshops on strengthening
family dynamics and ﬁnancial growth. The intentionality of the event was seen in the bilingual or
Spanish-speaking educators and staff who greeted the caregivers, and the food provided, pan
dulce (sweet rolls), was culturally signiﬁcant.
Principal Zavala wanted to elevate family engagement in ways that were more than just
checking-off boxes but were important to the families and relevant to the community. Outside of
the Saturday workshops, Principal Zavala and the educators, faculty, and staff met and reached
out to other organizations and programs in the community that would beneﬁt their families,
such as the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund or Lea Conmigo (Read With
Me). 
Principal Perez –
Principal Perez is an elementary school principal in a working-class neighborhood. The school's
resources were used to support a family engagement program called Parents as Authors where
school parents write a book about their family to share with their students. The program ran over
several months. Workshops staffed by educators included brainstorming ideas, sentence-
starters, editing, and ultimately, presenting their stories to their children. The value of this
approach was that it connected not just the families to the school and vice versa but families to
other families within the community. Principal Perez said that learning about families'
backgrounds, their experiences with education, and their hope for their students gave school
staff and educators a deeper understanding and empowered them to more strongly connect with
the families.
Principal Franco –
Principal Franco, or “Principal Learner,” as the sign on his door said, set up monthly Saturday
workshops at the school in addition to an annual parent conference. At the workshops, open-
ended questions served as the topics. For example, one topic was: "Why education is important to
me." Caregivers and staff alike share their experiences and thoughts in a guided discussion. These
meetings were important because they took a school and family connection that is typically
fragmented and turned into a "village." Aside from these workshops, Principal Franco moved
traditional “home visits” into a classroom with a group of parents to ease the stress families may
feel having educators in the home. The hope with these visits was that it would do more for
parental engagement than the traditional PTA meetings that had not succeeded in the past. 
Assistant Principal Young –
Assistant Principal Young knew that families in the community were suspicious of schools due to
previous discrimination and mistrust. Home visits were organized to meet the families where
they were. Visits took place over months and were on a voluntary basis. These visits were focused
on getting to know families and were strictly positive. As the Assistant Principal noted, engaging
with families requires leadership involvement or the efforts will fade out. Assistant Principal
Young saw a “snowball” effect with the families and staff involved in home visits; they were more
likely to engage in other activities, such as the Homework Club! The root of desiring and
structuring family engagement was based on Assistant Principal Young’s ﬁrm belief that families
are natural partners in a collective responsibility for children.

Implementing Collaborative Family Engagement Initiatives in Your School
The examples provided above offer valuable insights into effective strategies for collaborating
with families to enhance family engagement in schools. Indeed, you can use these examples to
implement similar initiatives in your own school. Here are a few key steps.
- Start by adopting an asset-based approach, recognizing the strengths families and
schools bring to the table.
- Host inclusive events that cater to your community's needs, fostering open
communication and mutual understanding.
- Utilize resources creatively, involving families in projects like the "Parents as
Authors" initiative to deepen connections.
- Offer diverse points of engagement such as workshops and meetings, addressing
potential barriers with solutions like childcare and transportation assistance.
- Engage school leaders and educators, creating a shared sense of responsibility.
- Leverage community resources to expand support networks, and prioritize building
trust and positive relationships.
By adapting these strategies to your particular context, you can establish collaborative practices
that enhance student success through meaningful family engagement.

Practical Strategies for Community Partnerships
Effective Approaches for Building School and Community
Connections
A key value of community partnerships is that they extend learning activities outside of the
school walls. Schools can network with community organizations, faith-based institutions,
businesses, libraries, or tutoring programs. Working with and within communities also moves
what can be an intimidating school environment to a more neutral or positive one. Let’s brieﬂy
look at the different strategies used for starting community partnerships.

Beginning a New Community Partnership: When identifying community organizations as possible school partners, a helpful place to
start is looking at the organization's values. You want the community partnerships to reﬂect
the values of the school and its families; values that establish and maintain continuity for
school staff, families, and students. 
You’ll cover expectations and values later in this course, but for now, look at the following
two examples of organizations you may consider for partnership: Coca-Cola® and Chick-
ﬁl-A®. The values of Coca-Cola® include leadership, collaboration, integrity, accountability,
passion, diversity, and quality. The values of Chick-ﬁl-A® are, "We're here to serve, we're
better together, we are purpose driven, and we pursue what's next."
Informal Beginnings: As simple as it sounds, community partnerships can start with an email or a phone call. If
you want to partner with a local restaurant, food bank, or faith-based institution, you can
most likely ﬁnd a contact person on their website with a phone number or email. Leverage
the connections you already have within your school. Ask: “What restaurants do you
frequent? Are there charity organizations where you volunteer?” If your school has a social
worker, given the nature of their job, they may know organizations to consider as partners. A
simple greeting and inquiry about openness to partnerships, or a conversation the next time
you stop by, can be the starting point for future collaboration between school and
community organizations and their leaders.
Formal Beginnings: If you don't have a relationship with an organization and want to reach out, try sending or
emailing a letter. Check out the templates below as an example (Riffel, 2016).
Here are the templates by Riffel (2016) combined in a
PDF. This resource includes letter templates and
example activities.
Community Involvement In Positive Behavior Support.pdf
337.6 KB
The second letter template (page 5) from Dr. Riffel is a perfect bridge to maintaining community
relationships. Maintaining community partnerships often looks like repeating events annually
(e.g., Christmas Toy Drives every December), systematic student/teacher discounts from
schools in a district at a local chain, or an after-school program held at faith-based or
recreational centers around the school. The theme in all of these is consistency and time.
Often, school psychologists and/or social workers in your schools will have examples of
maintained school-community partnerships or know of community organizations to join.
Given how these groups may move around within a district, have them create an Excel
spreadsheet with the contact information for community partners, both established and ones
hoped for, that your school can hold onto even if the school psychologist or counselor leaves! 
The template below is a spreadsheet to use when
beginning your outreach to community partners.
Community Partnership Template.xlsx
8.6 KB
Overall, community partnerships offer a valuable avenue for extending learning experiences
beyond the school building. Collaborating with community organizations, faith-based
institutions, businesses, libraries, and other entities not only enriches educational
opportunities but also contributes to creating a more welcoming and positive learning
environment. Through aligning with shared values, schools can establish partnerships that
resonate with their staff, families, and students, fostering continuity and mutual
understanding. Initiating community partnerships can take various forms, ranging from
informal connections through emails or phone calls to more formal approaches such as
sending introductory letters. Leveraging existing relationships, school personnel, such as
social workers, can play a pivotal role in identifying potential partners and initiating
conversations. These partnerships can then evolve into sustained relationships, marked by
consistent events and interactions that beneﬁt both schools and the broader community.
Through careful maintenance and organization of contact information, schools can ensure the
longevity of these valuable connections and continue to reap the beneﬁts of collaborative
community engagement.

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- South Carolina K-12 Framework provides ﬁve guiding strategies to structure family
engagement efforts around building relationships, communication, linking families
to learning outcomes, collaborative practices, and community partnerships. 
- Relationships develop from both daily interactions and planned events. Effective
relationship-building involves a combination of these aspects, beginning with
everyday moments that include body language and verbal affrmation. Despite their
apparent simplicity, these strategies hold signiﬁcance due to their universal
presence in all relationships.
- Effective communication with families can be in various forms communication
including positive home phone calls, inclusive language, and technology-based
communication.
-Involving families in their student's education is indeed essential. Conveying
speciﬁc ways parents can help, offering feedback channels on homework,
overcoming engagement obstacles, and acting as a resource broker are all practical
tips to strengthen family-school partnerships.
- Collaboration is a foundation for effective family engagement, detailing shared
responsibility, active participation, and shared decision-making.
- Community partnerships extend beyond the school building through collaborations
with diverse organizations, aligning shared values, and fostering a positive
environment. These relationships evolve into sustained interactions, beneﬁting
education and the community, with organized contact information ensuring
ongoing engagement.





*****
Building the Foundation with Tier 1- 1.2
School Climate and Safety Enhancement
Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
School Climate and Safety Enhancement
Outcomes:
1. Describe school climate and analyze factors inﬂuencing school climate including a
speciﬁc focus on school safety
2. Consider bullying and its impact on overall school climate and safety
3. Apply the critical features of the MTSS framework to enhance school climate and safety
4. Emphasize proven best practices for fostering a positive school climate and enhancing
safety 

What is School Climate?
The Pattern of how a School Functions and Feels
Image of a tree: side with lush leaves and green grass vs. side with a leaﬂess tree in
the desert sun
What are some ideas that come to mind when you hear the word climate? You might think of the
weather outside, and whether it’s hot or cold, sunny or rainy, calm or stormy. Whatever the
weather is, it can make a signiﬁcant difference in how you feel. You might need sunscreen or an
umbrella, a jacket or short sleeves, or you may not want to go outside at all. A climate is the
long-term representation of weather patterns, where individual days may display short-term
weather variations, but the overall climate reﬂects the typical conditions over an extended
period of time.
School climate is an overarching concept that describes the character and quality of a school.
The climate of a school signiﬁcantly impacts the experience of anyone entering the building,
either positively or negatively.
School climate includes the norms, attitudes, and beliefs of the school community, the way that
people are treated and treat others, the feeling within and surrounding the school, and the way
the school is perceived.  Like with the weather outside, each day may vary, but climate describes
a school's patterns over time and in general.

The Key Elements Contributing to School Climate
According to the Safe and Supportive Schools Model, school climate is the synthesis of three
factors:
- environment
- engagement
- safety
As demonstrated in the image, each of these elements overlaps to create an atmosphere that
profoundly inﬂuences academic achievement, behavioral choices, and the overall learning
experience.
Let’s explore each one.  
IMAGE HERE
A Venn Diagram of the three components of school climate

Environment
The environment is the broader context and circumstances in which learning takes place in a
school. The environment includes more than just the physical surroundings and has many
components. Flip through the ﬂashcards below to learn more details about what makes up a
school's environment.
Phyiscial Envioronment: The school building is the physical
environment, including the quality and functioning of the facilities,
level of cleanliness, ambiance, and how the school is furnished and
decorated.
Instructional Environment: The classroom environment includes the quality and rigor of
instruction, teacher attitudes, academic support, and the use of
evidence-based practices in the classroom.  
Physical Health: This refers to the amount that the environment contributes to
physical health. This contribution could be through encouraging and
educating students about nutrition, providing access to health
education, and providing access to sports, recess, and physical education.
Mental Health: This refers to how the environment supports mental health. The level of
awareness, stigma, and mental health literacy (MHL) programming
that schools support can all contribute to an environment that
promotes positive mental health.
Discipline:   This refers to the expectations and behavior management practices in
the school. Effective, positive behavior management strategies can contribute to a positive school
climate where students respect each other and follow school expectations. 

Engagement
Engagement within a school community refers to the level of participation and collaboration of
all school stakeholders, including educators, students, and the broader community. High levels
of engagement indicate that school community members feel comfortable, accepted, and valued
in the community. Building engagement involves the following: 
Cultural & Linguistic Comeptence: All backgrounds and identities are respected and valued. School staff are aware of their own identities and can relate to others from various backgrounds. If you have taken the Core MTSS course you know all about cultural and linguistic competence! If you haven't, go check out that course where there's a whole lesson dedicated to it! 
Relationship: Relationships between students, educators, and the community are nurtured. Positive relationships increase feelings of school connectedness and enable stronger academic progress for students. This greater connectedness increases the likelihood that families and communities will be involved.
School Participation: School participation includes how often and in what capacity community members participate. For students, this might look like attendance and participation in the classroom. For families and community members, this might look like attending school events, serving on leadership teams, volunteering, and other activities.   


Safety
School safety is essential to a positive school climate. School safety is about creating an
environment where students, teachers, and school staff are safe and free from physical or
emotional harm, whether this is from bullying, harassment, crime, or any other threat. Feeling
safe in the school environment makes students more willing to attend, participate, and build
positive relationships. When we talk about school safety, we don’t emphasize only physical
safety and keeping the school grounds free of violence. School safety also includes protecting
the social environment and relationships. We will take a much deeper dive into safety shortly,
for now, here is a look at the different facets of school safety. Flip through the ﬂashcards below.
Physical Saftey: This is what often comes to mind when thinking about safety: it
means being free from threats of violence, crime, natural disasters, diseases, or other physical harm. 
Emotional Saftey: This refers to feeling safe and secure in expressing and managing emotions at school. Students in emotionally safe climates feel that they belong, can express themselves, and have a network of support. Positive health and wellbeing (PHW) are important components for maintaining emotional safety. You will learn more about  PHW in the next lesson entitled “Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations.”
Bullying & Cyberbullying: Bullying is another concern that many students face in the school setting that can be disruptive to physical and emotional safety and greatly impact mental health. For more information about bullying, keep going with this lesson!   
Substance Abuse: Safety from substance abuse protects students from harm relating to alcohol, tobacco, drugs, or other substances. Schools with safety from substance abuse promote healthy habits and reduce or eliminate student exposure to harmful substances.  
Emergency Readiness & Management: his refers to safety from emergencies relating to violence, natural disasters, accidents, or epidemics. This level of safety involves having and acting on plans as needed. This includes the stages of prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery.

By understanding the importance of environment, engagement, and safety, educators can
cultivate a conducive atmosphere for learning and personal growth. Let's now delve deeper into
how these key school climate elements affect not just student academic success, but also
behavior and the mental well-being of all within the school community.

Considering the Far-Reaching Impact of School Climate
School climate is an extensive concept that ripples through every corner of the educational
landscape. As mentioned earlier, school climate inﬂuences student academic performance and
also students' social interactions and responses to disciplinary measures. Click through these
topics to understand how climate is profoundly connected to student outcomes.
Academics  –
Grades/Test Scores: School climate impacts a student’s learning. A positive school climate can
help students feel supported, motivated, and capable. Feeling safe and comfortable allows
students to focus on learning without other concerns taking precedence, ultimately impacting
grades and test scores. On the other hand, in a negative school climate, students may lack a sense
of belonging, feel unmotivated to participate in school activities, or be concerned about their
safety, all of which detract from learning.  
Attendance: Students are more likely to attend school when they feel safe, comfortable, and
supported. In a survey of youth, 15% of students reported skipping school because of feeling
unsafe within the past school year (CDC, 2019). Fostering a positive school climate and school
safety can help increase attendance and reduce the number of students who are chronically
absent. For a more in-depth look at the relationship between school climate and student
absenteeism download this article from the Journal of School Psychology, entitledHow School
Climate Relates to Chronic Absence: A Multi-level Latent Proﬁle Analysis.
Graduation Rate: Students who feel unwelcome and unsupported are less likely to want to
participate meaningfully in classes and academic work, increasing the likelihood of falling behind
academically. Students who miss more school because of a negative environment are also more
likely to fall behind academically and ultimately drop out (National Institutes of Health, 2020).
Fostering a safe and supportive school climate makes students more likely to attend school and
more likely to engage effectively with the school environment.   

Behavior and Discipline –
Behavior both reﬂects and inﬂuences school climate. In a positive school climate, students are
more likely to want to follow rules, to feel respected and supported, and to treat others with
respect. On the other hand, a negative school climate can also inﬂuence behavior and vice versa.
In a school with many negative behaviors, like violence and bullying, students and educators are
less likely to feel safe and comfortable.  
Discipline can also impact school climate. A positive and effective discipline system sets up clear
expectations for students and teachers, supports an environment where all students feel that they
belong, and cultivates respect between teachers and students. An ineffective discipline system can
lead to a higher rate of behavior problems, which can make students feel uncomfortable or
unsafe, distract attention away from learning, and contribute to teacher dissatisfaction and
burnout.  
School discipline systems may be overly strict, harsh, or punitive, which can contribute to
students' negative feelings, such as low self-esteem or feeling as though they don't belong. One
way that this can happen is through exclusionary discipline. Exclusionary discipline is any
discipline that removes students from the school environment, such as suspensions and
expulsions. Overuse of exclusionary discipline can lead to students feeling disconnected from and
unwelcome in the school environment. Use of this type of discipline can also increase the
likelihood of future behavior problems. Students from minoritized backgrounds are also more
likely to receive exclusionary discipline, contributing to disproportionality.
For more information on responding to student behavior, review "Creating and Implementing
Expectations" later in this course.

School climate can have an impact on student mental
health and the overall wellbeing of the school community
A positive school climate can help support positive mental health outcomes for students. On the
other hand, the incidence of mental health concerns directly correlates to a negative school
climate. For example, a school climate riddled with high rates of bullying can increase the
likelihood of students experiencing depression, anxiety, or substance use.  
Additionally, a school environment that lacks awareness and understanding of mental health
and mental health concerns may perpetuate misconceptions and biases surrounding
individuals experiencing mental health issues. School-wide programming that serves to reduce
stigma and increase mental health literacy can help provide a safer space for students in the
school, promote better self-esteem for students with mental health concerns, and increase
help-seeking behaviors.  

Supporting student mental health needs through climate
and safety MTSS practices
As you may already know from experience, comprehensive school mental health systems
nurture positive student outcomes. These systems offer a range of supports and services at
different levels to help improve school climate, foster social and emotional development,
enhance mental health and overall wellbeing, and contribute to a decrease in the prevalence and
intensity of mental health concerns.
Some of the most effective supports are
- using strength-based approaches
- working together with students and their parents/caregivers
- integrating MTSS practices that are evidenced-based, rely on data, and involve continuous
evaluation and quality improvement. 
Let’s further explore these key practices by examining the graphic below that illustrates how
these mental health supports address the critical needs for enhancing school climate and
promoting school safety.
IMAGE HERE
A graphic illustrating core components for supporting student mental health needs
School climate also inffuences educators, administrators, and other school staff,
shaping their experiences, attitudes, and effectiveness. Characteristics of a negative
school climate can contribute to stress and burnout for the educators in the school,
which can ultimately lead to reduced job satisfaction and high rates of turnover. A
positive school climate empowers educators, fosters a community of inclusion and
respect, and reduces stress. The upcoming lesson Wellness Enhancement for School
Staff will delve into educator burnout, stress issues, and wellness promotion
strategies targeting adults within the school building.

A Closer Look at School Safety
Understanding how School Climate and Safety are Interconnected
As mentioned earlier in the lesson, school climate and school safety share an intricate
relationship. Where the climate is the pattern over time,school safety is like the daily
weather: it is dynamic and can change rapidly. Just like a sunny day can turn stormy, even a safe
school environment can encounter safety concerns, such as violence. Thankfully, just like
checking and preparing for weather changes, schools can also prepare for potential safety
threats by implementing safety measures.
Preparing for the weather and assuring a safe school environment both involve being proactive
and taking necessary steps to reduce risk. Step one? Understand why students may be engaging
in school violence. Read on.

Uncovering Risks and Cultivating Resilience
Risk and protective factors help explain why a problem exists and why certain individuals or
groups are more or less likely to become victims of violence or become involved in violence.
Let’s begin with the risks.
Factors that can contribute to incidents of school
violence
You may recall from other lessons that risk factors are associated with
higher negative outcomes.The chart below examines in more detail a
combination of individual, relationship, community, and societal factors
that contribute to the risk of youth violence.
TABLE HERE
Table illustrating risk factors for school violence
It's important to note that not everyone exposed to these risk factors will engage in violent
behavior, however a complex interplay of the various risk factors can contribute to increased
chances of such incidents occurring. It is important for school administration, educators, and
all school staff to understand the possible risk factors that increase the likelihood of school
violence. With this knowledge, schools can improve the ability to detect problems, intervene
early, and minimize the chances of serious violence. 
Let's watch a video provided by the CDC to learn more
about what can put individuals at risk for violence and
what things can act as a protective buffer.
Moving Forward
Moving Forward
As can be seen from the video, a combination of experiences can contribute to school violence.
The risk of experiencing or participating in violence can either be increased or decreased
depending on the positive or negative factors in an individual's life.
Protective factors and measures to foster a safe school
environment
Now that we have discussed how exposure to violence and other risk factors can signiﬁcantly
impact a student's behavior and well-being let's examine certain protective factors that play a
role in enhancing resilience and reducing the likelihood of a student engaging in violence at
school.
TABLE HERE
Table illustrating protective factors that serve to minimize school violence
When students feel connected to their school, engaged in meaningful activities, and supported
by family, friends, and educators, they are less likely to resort to violence. A positive school
environment fosters a sense of purpose and promotes prosocial behaviors.

Resources for Enhancing School Safety
While we cannot guarantee a violent incident will never
occur at our school or in our community, there are
measures we can take to reduce the probability.
Megan Cave, 2018-PBISApps Marketing and Communication
SchoolSafety.gov was created by the federal government to empower districts, schools, and
parents with tools to improve safety and security. The website provides a one-stop-shop for
school safety resources and information. School districts can ﬁnd actionable
recommendations, guidance, training, events, and funding opportunities on a range of school
safety issues. Click and download the resources below for more information.
SCHOOLSAFETY
IMAGE HERE


Taking Immediate Action
Being Prepared for on-the-spot Responses to Crisis
Preparedness is essential for educators to effectively respond to immediate student crises or
school violence. In the event of such incidents, quick and informed actions can mitigate harm,
ensure safety, and provide necessary support. Administrators, educators, and staff need
training to recognize warning signs, establish communication protocols, and implement crisis
response plans. This readiness empowers them to swiftly intervene, provide aid, and collaborate
with emergency services, ultimately minimizing the impact of crises on students and
promoting a secure learning environment.

Averting School Violence
School violence refers to any form of physical, emotional, or psychological harm inﬂicted upon
students, educators, or staff members within the school setting. School violence encompasses a
range of aggressive behaviors that compromise the safety, wellbeing, and conducive learning
atmosphere of schools. Instances of school violence can manifest in various ways, such as
physical ﬁghts between students, bullying and harassment, verbal abuse, cyberbullying
through online platforms, and even more severe incidents like ﬁghts, weapon possession, or
acts of vandalism. The scope of school violence extends beyond physical harm, encompassing
emotional and psychological abuse, which can include social exclusion, spreading rumors, and
intimidation. These acts not only jeopardize individual safety but also impede the overall
educational experience for everyone involved. 
The possibilities of averting school violence are promising when approached through proactive
strategies. For example, fostering strong connections between students, teachers, and
parents/caregivers, through open communication channels can create supportive networks
that can identify and address potential issues before they escalate.
Insights gained from extensive research shed light on the effectiveness of preventive measures.
Between 1999 and 2017, the Averted School Violence Database, established to enhance the
understanding of averted and completed school attacks, identiﬁed 51 instances that were
prevented (Daniels, 2019). Although these ﬁndings only provide a preliminary overview, they
offer valuable suggestions and recommendations into the dynamics of averting school violence.
As you explore these recommendations below, always remember that having knowledge of
these averted attacks will inﬂuence our next action steps in reducing the likelihood of school
violence happening. Let’s examine these recommendations.
- Prepare for possible school-based crises: Law enforcement can prepare by being actively involved in planning emergency operations, developing
command communication structures with first responders, and clarifying roles and responsibilities in
reunification protocols.
- Develop relationships: Form relationships between law enforcement, school personnel (including school staff such as custodians
and cafeteria employees), and—most importantly—students.
- Know and work to improve the school’s climate: It is imperative that school staff are aware of the climate of the school and pay attention when students are singled out for bullying. They need to respond immediately and appropriately to this behavior.
- Know the physical facility and its important features: Law enforcement and first responders should know the layout of the school property, school emergency operations procedures, and ways to access technology such as cameras.
- Take all reports seriously and assume nothing: School violence can be planned and carried out at any type of school, any school level, and any location.
Apart from these recommendations, please examine the graphic below to visualize ﬁve
strategies to help prevent school violence. Click to enlarge.
Graphic showing strategies to prevent school violence
IMAGE HERE

Responding in the Moment
Effectively responding to behavior is critical in providing a safe school environment. When
crises are about to happen (e.g., someone is beginning to lose control), you need to use safe,
respectful, and non-invasive methods for managing disruptive and assaultive student behavior.
Review the ﬂashcards below for guidance in responding to student misbehavior.
- Deescalating yourself first: Before approaching a crisis situation, deescalate yourself first: remain calm and composed. Don’t run and scream at the student to change the behavior. Instead, walk to the student and calmly address the misbehavior. Be mindful that if you approach the student aggressively, you may also contribute to the escalation of the student.  Our goal is to effectively correct the student and deescalate them. This may be easier said than done, but you can get help from the Nonviolent Crisis Intervention program developed by the Crisis Prevention Institute (CPI). This program offers training that not only teaches staff to respond effectively to the warning signs that someone is beginning to lose control, but also addresses how teachers and staff can deal with their own stress, anxieties, and emotions when confronted with these challenging situations. 
- Asses the situation: Assess the situation: Determine the level of threat to yourself and others and take action to ensure safety. This involves considering factors such as the nature and intensity of behavior, presence of weapons, emotional state, history of similar actions, triggers, environment, communication of threats, physical capacity, and behavior duration. These factors, interconnected and evaluated collectively, guide informed decisions to ensure safety in each situation.
- Crisis Response team: crisis response team: If the situation becomes dangerous, don't hesitate to call for help. In schools, there is a trained team responsible for responding to crises. Have the designated, trained person go into the classroom (or where the incident is happening). Response teams could include administrators, school counselors, and School Resource Officers (SROs).
- Restrain: Crisis Prevention Institute (CPI) also provides restraint training, but only after there is a complete understanding of the risks, dangers, and liabilities of using the techniques. Because of the inherent instabilities involved, restraining should be your last resort in preventing harm and must be used only in emergency situations with an understanding of the risks involved.
- Power Struggle: Power struggle: Power struggles in schools can disrupt the handling of safety concerns. Conflicts among staff about safety strategies can hinder effective action. This can extend to conflicts between adults and students, leading to disruptions. To mitigate this, open communication and collaboration are crucial. Resolving conflicts with empathy and de-escalation strategies helps maintain a safe learning environment. Prioritizing teamwork, respect, and clear communication minimizes conflicts and focuses on student safety and growth.
- Student should know what to expect: Students should know what to expect: If a student is called-out for misbehavior, they should know what to expect. It is also important for the adults in the situation to know what the expectations are to minimize confusion. Routine helps prevent escalation. You will learn more about creating those expectations and communicating them clearly to all students in the next lesson!

It is important to remember that every situation is different and may require a unique response.
The goal should always be to maintain safety and resolve the situation in a calm and effective
manner. Be sure to check out our extremely enlightening and informative lesson on Crisis
Management!
Remember that having caring and nurturing relationships with students is of utmost
signiﬁcance. Many diffcult situations have been prevented because students have opened up to
trusted adults in the school setting.
Keeping schools safe requires multidisciplinary planning and implementation. Comprehensive
school safety and security plans address prevention, response, and recovery from crisis events.
Use the link below to download the "Ten Essential Actions to Improve School Safety" (School
Safety Working Group. 2020., Washington, DC Offce of Community Oriented Policing Services).

Exposing Bullying as a Major Threat to School Safety
Analyzing the Signiﬁcant Impact on Overall School Climate and
Safety
The fact is that in a school with a positive school climate, students are more likely to feel safe
from bullying and less likely to feel the need to engage in bullying behavior. Conversely, in a
school where many students are bullied, students don't feel safe.

What Is Bullying?
Bullying is an extremely signiﬁcant issue impacting school climate and school safety. In a
school where many students are bullied, students feel less safe. In a school with a positive
school climate, students are more likely to feel safe from bullying and less likely to feel the need
to engage in bullying behavior. Bullying is a very common issue in the school setting: around
20% of students nationwide, and 23% of students in South Carolina, have experienced bullying
during grades 9-12 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019). This number is also
higher for students of certain identities. In 9th-12th grade students, around 40% of LGBTQ
students, 30% of girls, and 30% of white students have experienced bullying at school or online,
compared to 19% of boys, 19% of African American students, and 18% of Hispanic students
(Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019).  It is important to note here that while these
statistics are for high school students, bullying is also prevalent (and frequently begins) in
middle schools and elementary schools.
Before learning more about bullying, let’s look at how to deﬁne it. There are many ways that
students may mistreat each other, get into disagreements, or otherwise be harmed—so how do
we know when actions indicate bullying? It is essential to make this distinction because
responses to other types of aggression are different from the responses that are needed to
address bullying. Bullying is deﬁned by the CDC as:  
“Any unwanted aggressive behavior(s) by
another youth or group of youths, who are not
siblings or current dating partners, that involves
an observed or perceived power imbalance, and
is repeated multiple times or is highly likely to be
repeated.”   - CDC, 2021
Let’s unpack this deﬁnition. First, bullying is unwanted aggressive behavior. This could be
behavior that’s mean or hurtful, like name-calling and hitting, or any other aggressive behavior
that results in some type of harm—physically, emotionally, or both.
The next part of the deﬁnition involves an observed or perceived power imbalance. Some things
that may contribute to a power imbalance include an older age, bigger size, higher social status,
popularity, or strength in numbers—a group of students compared to a single student, for
example. In a power imbalance, it is unlikely that having a child being bullied to ask the other
child to stop or apologize will be successful.
The last part of the deﬁnition involves behavior that is repeated multiple times or highly likely to
be repeated. This means that behavior is not a one-time occurrence but happens again and
again.  
This deﬁnition plays out in many different ways. When thinking about bullying, one common
stereotype is the “tough kid” who is bigger than all the other kids, often gets into ﬁghts, steals
other children’s lunch money, and has a tough home life. However, bullying is much more than
this. The CDC identiﬁes ﬁve types of bullying:
- Physical—hitting, kicking, punching 
- Verbal—name-calling or teasing 
- Relational/Social—intentional exclusion, spreading rumors, damaging relationships 
- Damage to property—stealing or breaking another student’s personal belongings 
-  Cyberbullying—online bullying: name calling, posting or commenting  
Just as there are many different forms of bullying, there are also many different reasons
students bully. Understanding this perspective can help us more effectively respond to bullying
behavior.
Here are some common reasons that students may bully others.
- Maintain social status by excluding others or controlling behavior of others
- Experience of family abuse, aggression, or violence
- Family with limited emotional support or low parental involvement
- Prior experiences being bullied
- Low self-esteem and insecurity
- Not understanding or empathizing with the emotions of others
Sometimes students who bully are called “bullies” or students who are bullied are called
“victims.” While these descriptions can be helpful, the label of a “bully” or a “victim” can
cause a child to feel as though their role is set and unchangeable, while this does not have
to be true.
Students who bully can be bullied, students who are bullied can also bully others, and
students are not deffned by either of these roles.  

Effects of Bullying
Regardless of the role being played, bullying has many, sometimes long-lasting, effects.
Students who are bullied, who bully others, and who are bystanders are more likely to
experience:  
- Increased anxiety, depression, self-harm, or substance use 
- Reduced interest in activities
- Increased feelings of isolation or loneliness 
- Increased likelihood of missing or skipping school and/or dropping out 
- Decreased academic performance, including grades and test scores

How to Respond to Bullying
Knowing that bullying can have these negative impacts on students, it is important to have a
plan for how to respond to bullying when it is witnessed. Bystanders, those who witness
bullying, have the potential to impact bullying as it is happening, either positively or negatively.
Bystanders can have various roles: peers, teachers, administrators, friends, family members, or
others. Depending on your role, you may respond differently.  
There are different types of responses to bullying behavior as a bystander. Flip through the
cards below to review how people respond.
- Reinforcers: These bystanders reinforce the bullying behavior. While they may
not be bullying themselves, they may laugh, cheer, or otherwise support the bullying.
- Outsiders: These bystanders see the bullying but do not participate, either by
bullying or being bullied. They also do not help, encourage, or discourage bullying: they only
witness it.
- Assistants: Assistants are like reinforcers but are more directly involved and
actively support bullying.
- Defenders: Defenders witness the bullying incident and take steps to
intervene. They may directly call out the behavior, ask the person
bullying to stop, or otherwise attempt to prevent the bullying from continuing.  

When bystanders intervene, bullying stops within 10 seconds 57% of the
time (stopbullying.gov, 2018). This shows the importance of
interveningin bullying incidents for students, educators, and anyone else
who may witness it.  
While it is important to intervene in bullying incidents, there are also some common reasons
why people may not intervene as listed below (CDC, 2018).   
- Concern about how intervening may impact their social status 
- Fear of retaliation or becoming the target of bullying
- Not knowing that the incident is bullying— they do not have enough information about the situation, or they do not know how to deﬁne bullying 
- Concern that they will not help the situation, or could make the situation worse
- Desire to intervene but not knowing how
Understanding these reasons can help educators and students best determine how to improve
their ability and willingness to respond. For example, if a school ﬁnds that many teachers want
to respond to bullying but do not know how, they can provide training on response strategies.
Having a strong response to bullying can help cultivate a positive school climate where respect
is valued and negative behaviors are discouraged, reducing the frequency of these behaviors and
improving school safety.

Analyzing the effectiveness of strategies used in
response to school bullying
There are many potential responses to bullying. In The Youth Voice Project (Davis and Nixon,
2013), 13,000 students were surveyed on whether responses to bullying were helpful, harmful,
or had no effect on them.
The graph below shows some of the common responses, as well as the percentage of students
who found the approach helpful. Click the image to enlarge.
IMAGE HERE
A graph summarizing the effectiveness of different bullying response strategies
There are many takeaways from this data: one thing to note is that the least helpful responses—
telling the person to stop, doing nothing, and pretending it didn’t bother me—are often given
as advice to students who experience bullying. While every bullying situation is different, these
data suggest that other approaches may be more helpful.  
Another takeaway from this data was that sometimes, adult responses are not helpful. When the
same students were surveyed to identify speciﬁc approaches that were most helpful from
adults, the results were again ranked from most to least helpful:
IMAGE HERE  
A graph displaying effectiveness of adult responses to bullying
For peers, the results had similar rates of effectiveness: 
IMAGE HERE
A graph depicting effectiveness of peer responses to bullying
Putting all this data together, the most helpful responses are listening to and spending time
with the person being bullied, while the least helpful responses involve ignoring the problem or
blaming the person being bullied. Again, while every bullying situation may be different and
require a different response, what is most likely to be helpful involves listening to and spending
time with the person being bullied, either as a peer or an adult.

Bullying Prevention Programs
There are several programs available to help prevent bullying. These programs vary in their
approaches, but each aims to create a safe and respectful school environment while
equipping students and educators with the skills needed to prevent and address bullying
behavior.
The Bully Prevention in Positive Behavior Support(BP-PBS) curriculum aligns with the
principles of positive behavior support and aims to create a safe and nurturing school climate
where bullying is less likely to occur. It draws on evidence-based practices to address the
various aspects of bullying, from prevention to intervention, with the goal of fostering a positive
and respectful school community. The curriculum is geared towards the elementary school
level.
PBIS Bullying Prevention Elementary School.pdf
1.4 MB
Bullying Prevention in Positive Behavior Support: Expect Respect is a handbook written with
and for middle and high school students. It also integrates bullying prevention efforts within
the framework of positive behavior support. It emphasizes cultivating a culture of respect and
empathy to prevent and address bullying behavior in schools.
PBIS Bullying Prevention Middle School.pdf
1.6 MB
Stop Bullying Now!is another prevention program for bullying. The link below shows you the
informative video series. The discussion guide is also provided for you to download and use with
the videos!
Kid Videos
Watch these videos to learn how KB, Josh, Milton, and their friends deal with kids who
bully. After watching each video, take a quiz to see how much you know about bullying.
READ MORE STOPBULLYING.GOV 
Stop Bullying Now Discussion Guide.pdf
1.6 MB

Enhancing School Climate and Promoting a Safe
School Environment 
Implementing Climate and Safety Initiatives within your School's
MTSS Framework
Collaborative Roles for School Climate and Safety
Understanding bullying, responding to crises, and taking measures to avert school violence are
important and immediate school climate factors. However, creating a sustained positive school
climate is a complex undertaking that all members of the school community can help support.
All members of the school community can help support a positive school climate. To review
roles of each member of the community, read the tabs below.  
State, District, or School Administrators –
State, district, and school administrators are leaders who can set the stage for successful
implementation of a positive school climate throughout entire schools or districts. They can
review data, serve on District Community Leadership Teams (DCLTs) and school-based teams,
and make decisions on which interventions to start, continue, or discontinue. Administrators can
also form policies and advocate for the importance of building a positive school climate. 
Teachers  –
Teachers also help support school climate. Teachers can inﬂuence school climate in their
individual classrooms. Adopting culturally responsive practices, involving families and
communities, and building strong and positive relationships with students can all contribute to
positive school climate. Teachers can also serve as positive role models for students.  
School Support Staff –
School support staff may include anyone working with a school aside from teachers and
administrators. These staff may be school social workers, counselors or psychologists, reading
specialists, nurses, or others in supportive roles in the school. These staff inﬂuence school climate
at the Tier 1 level, and at the Tier 2 and 3 levels for students who receive specialized interventions. 
School Resource Offfcers –
School resource offcers (SROs) are in the school setting to provide a safe learning environment,
enforce school discipline, and prevent and intervene in any school violence. The National
Association of School Resource Offcers (NASRO) aims to protect all students by providing
valuable resources to school staff while fostering positive relationships with students and
implementing best practices to prevent school violence. NASRO deﬁnes the main roles of SROs as
a “triad concept” where they can be: (1) educators, (2) informal counselors, and (3) law
enforcement offcers.
For more information about the SROs, please keep going with the lesson!
Family  –
School-family partnerships also contribute to school climate. Strong school-family-
partnerships with bidirectional communication provide opportunities for schools and families to
align expectations and values, build strong relationships, and support each other. To review more
information about school-family partnerships, review our lessons in Core MTSS and in this Tier 1
Module!
Community  –
Like families, communities contribute to a positive school climate through partnerships with the
school. Further, communities provide the context for understanding and appreciating the
strengths and challenges that surround the lives of students in your school.


Implementing School Climate and Safety Practices within the MTSS Framework
Developing and sustaining a positive school climate involves proactive measures that address
problems before they become major concerns. A strong integrated MTSS enables targeted
support for enhancing school climate and safety at all three tiers, with foundational
preventative initiatives in place at the Tier 1, or universal, level. Successful implementation
allows all students to feel safe, supported, and better able to focus on learning and growing.
IMAGE HERE
A graphic illustrating Multi-Tiered System of Supports triangle
A positive school climate emerges from intentional safety-focused initiatives and
environmental enhancement practices. Schools can utilize the critical features of the MTSS
(data-informed decision making, collaborative teamwork, professional development, family
and community engagement) to support sustained implementation of evidence-based school
safety practices and ongoing monitoring of school climate.

Using data to make decisions about positive school climate practices
According to the Safe Supportive Schools Model, there are ﬁve steps to improving school
climate that can be thought of as a cycle. Data is taken to determine how things are going. Using
that data, interventions are evaluated, and decisions are made to continue, improve, or replace
interventions. Changes are planned and then implemented. Then, the cycle begins again! For
more details, review the graphic below. Click to enlarge the image.
IMAGE HERE
Cycle of School Climate Enhancement
Let's look at each step of the cycle in more detail!
Supporting School Climate
The aim here is to consistently optimize students' academic success, emotional
development, and overall life outcomes while minimizing the risk of negative
behaviors and incidents. Scroll through for more information

Step 1: Review and Evaluate Data 
As mentioned earlier, improving school climate in the MTSS framework involves
making use of the data that is available to you. There are several sources of data for
measuring school climate, such as these:
- Attendance data 
- Academic data: grades, test scores, graduation rates 
- Behavioral data: offce discipline referrals (ODRs)  
Surveys and feedback:  
- PBIS Center Surveys—the PBIS Center has several surveys available for families,
staff, and students to assess the various aspects of school climate. For a full guide
and link to these surveys, review the document below, PBIS School Climate
Surveys.pdf 
- School Safety Surveys (SSSs)— some school climate surveys focus on safety
speciﬁcally. 
Please recall that Tier 1 supports are universal meaning that ALL students are assessed
with these surveys.
Remember from the Core MTSS course, you learned about needs assessment and
progress monitoring. In supporting school climate, we use needs assessment and
progress monitoring data on student outcomes to support students' behavioral,
social, emotional, and academic needs.
Data can be used at the individual, family, and community levels. Review each in the
next section of this lesson.

Step 2: Assess Current Programmatic Interventions 
The next step in the process is to assess the current interventions that are in place.
Important questions to ask at this stage are:  
- What interventions are being used, if any? 
- What does the data suggest about the effectiveness of these programs? 
- What are the priority challenges and needs in our school that could be addressed
through intervention? 

Step 3 Select Programmatic Interventions
Using the information you've gotten from analyzing your data and assessing your
interventions, the next step is to select which programs to start, continue, or
discontinue. There are many options for programmatic interventions that are
available for use in the school setting to address climate at the Tier 1 level. Here are
some examples of programmatic interventions.
- Schoolwide PBIS
- Stop Bullying Now
- Olweus Bullying Prevention Program
- Restorative Practices
- Mental health literacy programs
- Positive health and wellbeing universal programming

Step 4 Plan Changes 
The next step is to plan the implementation of the intervention selected. Important
questions to ask at this stage are:  
- What is the process for adapting this intervention? 
- Who will be involved with implementation, and what will their role be? 
- When will we start implementation? 
- How will we monitor our progress? 

Step 5 Implement Changes 
At this stage, the planning from Step 4 is put into action! With solid planning as a
foundation, you are ready to begin implementing changes. 
Summary
Once changes are being implemented, the next step is to once again review data and
evaluate, restarting the cycle! School climate improvement is far from a one-time
event: it is a continual process.  


Different Levels of Data
As mentioned in the steps above, data can be used at the individual,
family, and community levels.
- Individual Level: You can use the SSSs result and look for factors that can increase students' risk of being involved in being victims of crime or violence. After identifying these factors, you can encourage your students to be involved in various preventive activities. Some examples of these activities include conﬂict-resolution classes and skill-building training groups or intergenerational projects where community elders share knowledge and traditions with youth.
- Family and Peer Levels: At the family or peer levels, your goal should be enhancing the strength and well-being of ALL families, caregivers, and peers. You can achieve this by encouraging families, caregivers, and peers to involve themselves in activities including mentoring programs for
parents/caregivers, after-school programs involving parents/caregivers, and peer mentoring programs. These mentoring programs promote social skills and positive attitudes and behaviors. These activities support skill development in parents and caregivers, especially those who care for youth who may be at risk for violence.
- Community and School Levels: At the community and school levels, the results of the SSSs should lead you in directions to increase schools’ and communities' ability to prevent crime and victimization. At this level, activities should promote community cooperation for crime prevention through social development and will involve various stakeholders including schools, teachers, social agencies, and parents/caregivers. These prevention activities could include holding public meetings or workshops on community issues, developing community action plans, building public awareness and consensus building, running school-based anti-bullying campaigns, or creating networks and coalitions to address crime and victimization problems. 

School-wide Practices to Help Support Positive School Climate
Implementing climate and safety surveys
For a review of PBIS Center School climate surveys, including sample surveys, download the
information below.
Download the following PDF for an example of a School Safety Survey developed by the
University of Oregon.
The National Center on Safe, Supportive Learning Environments also has several surveys
available for use. To explore these surveys, as well as a question bank to create your own
surveys, review the link below.
School Climate Survey Compendium
As States, districts and schools explore measuring school climate, one of the
biggest questions they have is about which survey to use. It can be diffcult to
know which surveys are valid and reliable, what they measure, and which are
free.
READ MORE ED 
School Safety Surveys (SSSs) are used to determine risk and protective factors for
schools. In the Core MTSS course, you learned about team-based leadership. These same
teams use SSS results to assess risk and protective factors. SSS also helps you determine
what training and support may be needed to address school safety and violence
prevention in the school.
Implementing practices geared toward building and
maintaining strong relationships
There are many relationships in a school: as you likely know from experience, everyone in the
school is interconnected in various ways. For example, there are relationships between:
- Students and other students
- Students and teachers
- Students and administrators
- Teachers and administrators
- Teachers and other teachers
- School support staff and teachers
…and many more! The way that various groups are treated makes a big difference in the climate
of the school and how welcomed, safe, and supported everyone feels.  
Strong student-to-teacher relationships are extremely important in supporting a positive
school climate. While teachers often want to build strong relationships with students, they may
face challenges along the way. When this happens, it is important to have a plan for what to do.
An Establish-Maintain-Restore model is one approach for this, which you brieﬂy touched on in
the previous lesson: "Elevating Family and Student Engagement" (Cook, 2018). This method
involves three steps to building strong relationships:  
1 Establish the relationship: From the start, be intentional to build a strong student-
teacher relationship. The goal at this stage is to build trust, foster acceptance, and
gain understanding. This time given to building relationships is called “banking.”
Teachers make “deposits” of time and energy that help build up a strong and
meaningful relationship that can be called on in more diffcult times.  
2 Maintain the relationship: The next step is to maintain these relationships through
ongoing positive interactions. It is recommended to have a ratio of 5:1 for positive to
negative interactions with students (Cook, 2017). Examples of positive interactions
may include compliments, empathy, positive greetings in the morning, praise for
schoolwork or behavior, and any other positive statements. Negative interactions
may include misunderstandings, disagreements, discipline or other negative
statements.  
3 Restore the relationship:This phase addresses how to respond
to negative interactions. While it is helpful to try to prevent
negative interactions as much as possible, it is very common
that they may still occur, so it’s also important to be able to
respond as effectively as possible to move forward in the
relationship. 
Restoring the relationship can be particularly challenging. Here are ﬁve methods for restoring
the relationship (Cook, 2018).
- letting go of the previous event
- taking responsibility for or ownership of the problem 
- validating student feelings with an empathy statement 
- solving problems collaboratively 
- making a statement of care by separating the deed from the doer 
The use of these ﬁve methods will likely depend on the speciﬁc situation and student, and
combinations of these methods may also be needed. However, across all situations, the core
values of empathy and respect can go a long way in supporting positive relationships.
For a video on building relationships through daily
handshakes, watch the video below!
VIDEO HERE
This video highlights fifth-grade teacher Barry White Jr. of Ashley Park Elementary
School in Charlotte, North Carolina, and how he greets his students with special
handshakes every day before they enter class.
Simply arriving at school in the morning is such an important part of the day. Students bring in
whatever happened last night or right before school, and greetings are just one of the many
ways educators can, and are, "checking in" with each student.
Here is a video about the importance of greeting students at the door!
Greeting Students at the Door || Is it Worth the Extra Time?
Additional Efforts to Support Positive School Climate
Let's examine the best practices and key stakeholders—
so you know your role and others—in promoting
positive school climate and safe schools.
The practices aimed at fostering a positive school climate can be categorized into three distinct
sections based on their impact, priority, and effort it takes to implement. They are:
- Short term practices: These are the easiest and quickest to implement to address a
need. You can use these practices to quickly identify and ﬁnd solutions to a
situation. These are in the graphic's blue column below.
- Medium term practices: These will take some time and have a meaningful impact.
Implementing these strategies may take medium effort. These are in the graphic's
white column below.
- Long term practices: These will require the most effort yet will have a greater
impact. Implementing these practices will require extensive time and development.
These are in the graphic's green column below.
In implementing these strategies, we suggest you use a range of short-, medium- and long-
term practices.
When implementing these new practices, always be mindful of the existing strategies in the
school setting. To avoid confusion and remain effective, either integrate new practices into
existing ones or limit the implementation of new ones.
Another thing to consider is that starting small and going big is fruitful! When you start small
and support school safety through school climate efforts, you are more likely to be successful.
Always remember to celebrate successes, whether they are small or big! 
Explore the practice below.
Short term, Identify hotspot: Where are the hotspots? Look for and observe the unsafe areas in the school. These areas may be
playgrounds, under stairwells, or in other locations. Once you find these hotspots, talk with students and
ask them how they feel about their safety in these areas. If you are unable to locate these hotspots, and
students do not want to talk about them, provide them with a map of the school and color code the areas
(for example, green being the safest area and red being the least safe).
Key stakeholders: Teachers, school counselors, and other school personnel are engaged in this practice.
Be sure to also include students and understand their perspectives. This approach will also make students
feel heard!
Short term, Respond to stressful or painful events: Observe and document what students express about stressful or painful events. Then engage with students
about these events. Understanding how students feel about these events will help you promote school
climate and safety as you see the bigger picture and better understand how the issues impact them. 
Key stakeholders: This practice includes teachers, students, parents and caregivers and other members of
the school community.
Medium term, Personal commitments: Encourage students and all staff to create and reflect upon personal commitments to the— work of
improving and enhancing school safety. These commitments will promote a sense of accountability and
responsibility.
Key Stakeholders: Engage all school personnel and students in this practice. Students can practice writing
these commitments as part of their instructional time. For school staff and other professionals, this work
can be done during departmental meetings and/or in professional learning communities.
Medium term, Creating classroom expectations: Creating classroom expectations is another way to promote school climate and safety. When creating
classroom expectations, it is important to involve students. When students are involved in creating
classroom norms and management, they are more likely to obey these norms and less likely to misbehave.
For more information about classroom expectations, continue to our lesson on “Creating and
Implementing Schoolwide Expectations.” 
Key Stakeholders: The key stakeholders in creating classroom expectations are students, and classroom
teachers.
Medium term, consider byu-in from educators early in the year: It is essential for all educators involved with promoting school climate and safety to be on the same page and willing to participate. To address the potential resistance from adults in promoting all facets of school
safety, it is beneficial to initially assess areas of discomfort. Surveying teachers and staff about potential
concerns they may have can help address these issues and ensure buy-in. 
Key Stakeholders: Engage all staff. This is most effective in all-staff meetings at the start of the school
year so that all school personnel, not just teachers, are included and their voices are heard.
Medium term, ongoing discipline policy review:Use discipline data to identify the discipline policies that are most used. Identify whether the policies are overused. To make sure that the policies are appropriate, you can also align school policies with district
vision statements. Holding focus groups with teachers, principals, parents, and student groups allows for
the identification of pain points for each stakeholder group. Another step districts can take is to develop
MOUs with school resource officers that are based on best practices and reflect their responsibilities in
district policy.
Key Stakeholders: School district level staff, parents and caregivers, and students are the stakeholders
here, ensuring all voices are heard.
Medium term, Similar to the earlier recommendation to include students in developing their classroom norms,
promoting student engagement and the student voice is important for effective school climate
improvement efforts. When students are given the opportunity to be heard and to participate in
schoolwide initiatives, there is a greater likelihood of successful efforts. This success, in turn, creates a
safer school environment.
Key Stakeholders: Here, the key stakeholders are your students! Get students involved to have them
heard!
long term, have morning meeting with students: Implementing morning meetings daily or weekly can help you develop stronger ties with your students.
These could be short 10 to 15-minute check-ins to support student needs across the school year.
Key Stakeholders: Teachers and students are the key stakeholders but  provide support to teachers by also
identifying additional school staff to engage with students on a regular basis through a defined schedule.
Analyze student performance data: To have effective outcomes, teams need to develop systems and processes for analyzing student behavior
and academic performance data on an ongoing basis. Educators should set outcome goals for each student
or cluster of students who are below, at, and above the target objective level. Performance data should
include both academic and non-academic indicators of student success.
Key Stakeholders: School support staff, classroom teachers, administrators, and non-licensed classroom
staff are all stakeholders for this practice.

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- School climate refers to the environment of a school and has a signiﬁcant impact
on how students, teachers, and staff experience the school setting
- The goal is to create a positive school climate and a safe school environment for all
students, school staff, and parents/caregivers by preventing and responding
quickly to violence in schools
- Be proactive, rather than waiting for violence to happen. Proactive approaches are
always the most effective in addressing challenges with school safety
- Bullying is a common concern for students that can negatively impact school
climate and safety. There are many programs and strategies for preventing and
reducing bullying that can be used to help prevent it
- When enhancing school climate and averting school violence, implement the
evidence-based strategies and practices as recommended in this lesson. In
implementing these approaches, be mindful that a one-size-ﬁts-all approach does
not work for preventing school violence. Always use data to ensure that
programming is having the intended impact
- Relationship enhancement is one way to improve school climate and safety. To
enhance relationships, you can use the Establish-Maintain-Restore (EMR) model
- A combination of short-, medium-, and long-term practices can help promote
school climate and school safety
Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations





@@@@@
Lesson 2 of 2
Creating and Implementing Schoolwide Expectations
Outcomes:
1. Analyze expectations within the school context
2. Demonstrate the importance of schoolwide expectations as they relate to academics,
behavior, and positive health and wellbeing
3. Identify and explain the process of creating academic, behavioral, and positive health
and wellbeing expectations
4. Address practically implementing schoolwide expectations
5. Critically evaluate responses to students when expectations are or are not met

Expecting...the Expected?
Expectations in the School Setting
What to Expect When You're Expecting 's book cover
In 1984, Heidi Murkoff published What to Expect When You're Expecting. This pregnancy guide
used a question-and-answer format to address common worries or curiosities expecting
parents had about their pregnancy. Since its publication, What to Expect When You're
Expectinghas sold more than 42 million copies, was turned into a movie by Lionsgate in 2012,
and expanded into an online community with a website and app.
Whether it's about pregnancy, job offers, or how your dog will behave at the dog
park, everyone has expectations for everyone and everything.
The popularity of What to Expect When You're Expectingshows how much value people place on
understanding expectations. The importance of deﬁning and knowing our expectations in
school is no different!
Expectations:anticipated outcomes or standards for a certain situation, person, or behavior.

Expectations in Schools
In schools, expectations are intentionally broad. They are linked to more speciﬁc rules or skills,
which are the tools used to meet expectations. Rules and skills can be set up to support learning,
behavior, and positive health and wellbeing. Speciﬁc rules, skills, and expectations should be
matched to student and staff values, developmental levels, and cultural backgrounds. 
Here are some examples of the most widely used schoolwide social expectations in the United
States (Lynass et al., 2012):
Be respectful
Be responsible
Be safe
Be ready to learn
Care
Work together
Do your best
Be kind
Expectations are the blueprint and Tier 1 supports are speciﬁcs created
to get there. These supports should be accessible to everyone!
Let's listen to Dr. Jake Klipsch, a principal in an
alternative high school, explain how vital expectations
are in education.
Watch from 0:00 to 5:17; don't worry - we will come back for the rest later in this lesson!
The Reality We Create: Expectations and Education | Jake Klipsch ……
The Reality We Create: Expectations and Education | Jake Klipsch 
As you can tell, expectations play a signiﬁcant role within our schools. By proactively creating
and implementing schoolwide expectations about academics, behavior, and positive health and
wellbeing*, provide students and staff with a school climate that is predictable, welcoming, and
respectful.
Positive health and wellbeing refers to the social, emotional, and mental healthiness of a
person.This is the term we, The SBHA, use, but you may be more familiar with the term
"social emotional learning” which you will still see in the outside resources we link! Don’t
worry. Even though the term we use in these lessons is "positive health and wellbeing", the
material shared with “social emotional learning” in it still applies!
We can neither excuse nor scold them for not knowing; we
must teach them and provide support, insistence, and
expectations.
Dr. Ruby K. Payne, Educator and Expert on Poverty and Schooling
Like Dr. Payne said, one cannot assume that students know all our expectations, so you need to
intentionally teach and promote them in such a way that every student can meet them.
Ultimately, schoolwide expectations are a common language of appropriate behaviors and
attitudes for all students and staff to understand. 
In this lesson, you will analyze how to create and implement schoolwide expectations, evaluate
types of expectations within a school, and examine how expectations can be used to build
healthy relationships. First—a knowledge check!

Making Expectations
The "Who" and "How" Behind Creating Expectations
Who Creates Expectations at the School?
Creating and implementing schoolwide expectations is a team effort! Teaming is a core
component of the Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS) framework.
Your school may have a Tier 1 Leadership Team that creates the schoolwide expectations, or
your school may have a general leadership team that does so. Whether your school has teams
within teams or a couple of larger groups, your schoolwide expectations are ideally co-created
with educators, administrators, families, school health and behavioral health staff, community
partners, and students. Expectations should be a consensus, reﬂecting values shared by your
entire school community.
When possible, the team creating schoolwide expectations will discuss them before the school
year starts and then monitor them throughout the academic year. To protect and promote your
relationships with families, educators, and students especially, use emailed or texted surveys as
a solution to gather suggestions, feedback, and input from families with busy schedules. Focus
groups, whether online or in person, can further the conversation about expectations, from
their creation to their completion. 
Family in a room with a fort in the background
As you learned in Lesson Two, you know family engagement promotes
healthy youth development. When it comes to co-creating schoolwide
expectations, engaging with parents and caregivers ensures that the
expectations are culturally relevant and reﬂect student and family values. It
also prompts discussion about the differences between expectations within
the school and those at home.
Partnering with Students & Families
Students affrm that the more involved they are in creating and implementing expectations, the
more they care about following them (Llyod et al., 2022). 
Here are practical ways you can partner with students and families.
- Surveys asking for household values and input on schoolwide expectations while
drafting expectations
- Emails asking for feedback on schoolwide once a list is created
- Focus groups with students, parents, and caregivers that are held in person or
virtually
- Brainstorming classroom expectations with your students during teh ﬁrst two
weeks of school
- Gathering suggestions from students by using drop boxes throughout classrooms
- Partnering with diverse students, parents, and caregivers in the leadership team responsible for creating and implementing expectations.
When creating expectations with students, do this at the developmentally appropriate level.
Whether creating a song with elementary students about expectations, a TikTok dance with
your middle schoolers, or a straightforward paragraph in response to a prompt with high
schoolers, creating and implementing expectations with students builds relationships and sets
you up for success. 
When brainstorming your schoolwide expectations, use data regarding student outcomes and
behavior, family and student input, and the decisions from the leadership team to create three
to ﬁve schoolwide expectations.
Guidelines for Creating Expectations
As you contemplate creating expectations, it can be helpful to consider the following:
- "What is it we want our students to know and be able to do?"
- "How will we know if each student has learned it?"
- "How will we respond when students do not learn it?"
- "How will we extend learning for students who demonstrated proﬁciency?"
How you answer these questions, asked by Jeremy Phillips (2022; p.56), can be a helpful,
intuitive starting point for determining the expectations you want to have in your schools for
students.
Because expectations are for both students and staff, let's reframe these questions to involve
staff as well.
- How will we ensure our students learn expectations through our teaching and
example?
- What takeaways do we want students to have when we reinforce expectations?
- How will we verify that we are following standards for creating, implementing, and
following expectations?
With these questions in mind, you can create schoolwide expectations with the following
guidelines adapted from Teacher Tool Classroom Expectations and Rules (2017):
Observable
Measurable
Understandable
Always Applicable
Memorable
Positively Stated
Look through the tabs by using the arrows on either side to learn more about each guideline and
see examples as needed!
Observable –
The schoolwide expectations become observable when linked to rules or skills that you can see in
use by students to meet the expectations.
Example: The expectation, “Be Respectful” is observable with the rule or skill, “Raise Your Hand
During Class Before Speaking”.
Measurable –
You should be able to “count” students fulﬁlling rules and skills associated with each expectation.
You can count how many students are following the expectations based on their disciplinary
referrals, the number of students receiving Tier 3 supports, academic outcomes, and so on.
Example: The expectation, “Be Honest” can be measured by the number of students referred to
the offce for disciplinary action regarding cheating or plagiarism. 
Understandable –
Each expectation and its associated rules are tailored to the developmental and cultural
backgrounds of the students they apply to.
Example: In an elementary school, the expectation, “Be Respectful” comes with the rule, “Keep
Your Hands and Feet to Yourself," whereas a high school rule may be, “Be mindful of others'
personal space.” 
Always Applicable –
As you may have noticed, the expectations are a bit vague. This is intentional: the expectations
must be broad enough to cover the varied contexts and situations within a school setting. Having
a broad expectation ensures that it is the standard instead of an exception. 
Example: The expectation "Be Safe" can be contextualized to crosswalks, classrooms,
equipment, and online activity. However, making "Check Signals Before Crossing in the Parking
Lot" an expectation instead of a rule prevents it from applying across other school areas.
Memorable –
It is important for students and staff to recall their school’s expectations. Connecting
expectations to the school motto, mascot, or name can be helpful ways to increase memorability.
Having memorable expectations is another reason why no more than ﬁve expectations are
encouraged. Alliteration can also be helpful!
Example: “Be Ready, Be Responsible, Be Respectful" is an example of alliteration in expectations.
Another example of memorable expectations is “Sutton Hill School’s Star Ways: Be Safe, Be
Thoughtful, Be Aware, Be Respectful”. 
Positively Stated –
Expectations are the standards for what to do, instead of what not to do. This is important: it is
the difference between being proactive with positive behavior, values, and attitudes rather than
being reactivetowards what is unhelpful or disruptive.
Example: A positively stated value is, “Be Trustworthy,” whereas “Don’t Cheat, Don’t Lie, and
Don’t Gossip” are negatively stated expectations. 
You have learned what expectations are, why they're important, and the "how-to" of creating
them practically. After a you take break and pass this knowledge check, move forward to
examine three key types of expectations in the school setting: academic, behavioral, and
positive health and wellbeing.


Academic Expectations
Expectations for Coursework and Classrooms
This is a brief section; after all, you're already familiar with schoolwide academic expectations! 
The South Carolina Department of Education’s standards for learning are your schoolwide
expectations for learning. Attached a link to those standards broken up by subject if you want a
refresher.
Standards & Learning
The Offce of Standards and Learning provides standards development,
supporting documents for standards, and professional learning.
READ MORE SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Check out an example of academic standards below!
IMAGE HERE
Graphic comparing South Carolina's Standards of Learning for mathematics for
kindergarteners and high schoolers
These expectations are...
- Observable and measurable based on academic performance (e.g., number of students passing, end-of-course grades, etc.)
- Understandable for each developmental and cultural level
- Always applicableto every student in every school
- Positively stated by focusing on what students willlearn rather than what they have not learned or will not
While your school already uses the State standards for academics, you can take it further by
creating school expectations for improvement or effort. Those may be classroom expectations
you make as an educator. If you would like to learn more about taking schoolwide expectations
and adapting them for your speciﬁc classroom, take our Tier 2 course! 
For now, let's move onward to look more in-depth at behavioral expectations before diving into
positive health and wellbeing expectations.

Behavioral Expectations
Expecting the Best Out of Actions
Chances are, you already know a thing or two about behavioral expectations in your school.
Perhaps the most well-known example of schoolwide expectations regarding behavior is
Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS). Your school may even be using PBIS to set
schoolwide behavioral expectations already. If so, these principles will be helpful refreshers. If
your school does not use PBIS, you will ﬁnd valuable principles that can be applied in your
schools and classrooms! 
While all expectations interact with one another, behavioral expectations are crucial in
establishing a predictable environment wherein the other expectations can ﬂourish.

Practical Steps to Setting Up Schoolwide Behavioral Expectations
To brainstorm schoolwide behavioral expectations, the National PBIS Leadership Forum in 2011
encourages educators to take three to ﬁve schoolwide expectations and attach two to ﬁve
descriptors of speciﬁc, observable behavior that exemplify meeting those expectations in each
speciﬁc school context (e.g., hallway, cafeteria, school drop-off). 
These are the "Turning Cellphones Off while in the Classroom"
rulesthat link back to the "Be Respectful" expectation.
To jumpstart your thought process, ask yourself: "How would a student display being respectful
within the cafeteria? Howcwould they show that they're being safe? What about responsible?"
Teaching matrices are an extremely helpful method of organizing your answers to these
questions and the descriptors you attach to your expectations. A helpful tip is to ﬁll out each
context as a team, but let individual teachers create their own expectations for their speciﬁc
classrooms.
Check out some examples below by clicking on them to
IMAGE HERE
If you're in need of more inspiration, you can download the attached resource from the
Oklahoma Department of Education that has examples of teaching matrices for elementary,
middle, and high schools! 
Example Behavior Expectations Matrices .pdf
791.2 KB
Attached is also this blank, customizable template for you to use!
Customizable Behavioral Matrix.pdf.png
170.5 KB
When thinking through the behaviors you want to emphasize with your behavioral
expectations, review your data. Use the data gathered from offce discipline referrals (ODRs),
teacher and student input, and observations as a team to ﬁnd those areas. 
As you outline the expected behavior, remember to keep your expectations positively stated. For
example, use “Listen to Each Other Without Interrupting” instead of “Don’t Talk Over Each
Other." 
Students learn and internalize the expectations presented by the school through explicit
instruction, reteaching, prompted opportunities to exhibit skills, and modeled behaviors by the
educators themselves. 
The Importance of Contextualizing Behavioral Expectations
In a study of 155 schools across 12 regionally representative US states, Lynass et al. (2012) found
the following behavioral rules to be the most common under the top three most common broad
expectations: respect, responsibility, safety.
TABLE HERE
There is a lot of overlap between behavioral expectations, as well as a lot of ambiguity! You can
click on the Venn diagram to enlarge it if needed.
IMAGE HERE
Venn diagram of three circles: respect, responsibility, and safety
It is important to contextualize your behavioral expectations in that which is culturally and
developmentally relevant to your student body while simultaneously acknowledging that some
expectations may have different meanings for different groups. 
For example, it is common to eat with one’s hands in many cultures. This may not appear as
“neat and clean” to those who are accustomed to using cutlery. These differences don't mean
that one group is “right” and the other is “wrong." When interpreting behavioral expectations
for students, rely on input from families and students, especially those from different cultures
and backgrounds. Creating more detailed deﬁnitions of “Neat and Clean” to broaden staff and
students' awareness can clarify a subjectivity that may contribute to inequity or stigma. 
With a ﬁrmer understanding of behavioral expectations, you're ready to review positive health
and wellbeing expectations after this knowledge check.

Positive Health and Wellbeing Expectations
Supporting Wellbeing Intentionally
It may feel odd to have expectations and subsequent rules for students' and staff's positiv
health and wellbeing. However, as you've already learned, Tier 1 supports are proactive and
preventative. By articulating standards through expectations, you are better able to see when
students are struggling to reach those goals. This, in turn, equips us to determine which
students need additional support from Tier 2 or Tier 3.
Schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing shows
students and staff that youcare about more than just their academics
or behavior, but thatyou care about their whole being as well.
Schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing contribute to our desire for students
to grow, not just academically, but mentally, emotionally, and socially. Schoolwide expectations
for positive health and wellbeing contribute to that growth the same way expectations for
academics and behaviors do. 
Practically Setting Schoolwide Expectations for Positive
Health and Wellbeing
It can feel overwhelming to think through positive health and wellbeing expectations for your
school. Positive health and wellbeing covers a broad spectrum, encompassing mental, social,
and emotional aspects. You will learn more about what this looks like practically in the next
lesson on elevating wellness! For now, the good news is that the state of South Carolina already
outlined ﬁve core areas of positive health and wellbeing in its Proﬁle of a South Carolina
graduate! These are based in the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning
(CASEL).
Self-Awareness
Social Awareness
Self-Management
Relationship Skills
Responsible Decision Making

Positive Health and Wellbeing
What competencies in positive health and wellbeing should a South Carolina graduate
possess?
Step 1
Self-Awareness
Recognizing one's emotions, thoughts, and values; knowing one's strengths and
limitations; grounded self-conﬁdence; a "growth" mindset
Step 2
Social Awareness
Taking the perspective of and empathizing with others, including those who are
different from oneself; understanding social norms in different settings; recognizing
supports in one's school, family, and community for behavior and attitudes
Step 3
Self-Management
Regulating one's emotions, thoughts, and behavior in any situation; managing
impulses, self-motivation to set, work towards, and accomplish goals
Step 4
Relationship Skills
Establishing and maintaining healthy, mutually fulﬁlling relationships with people
of all backgrounds; communicating clearly; navigating conﬂict; being ﬁrm against
inappropriate peer pressure
Step 5
Responsible Decision Making
Making constructive choices about one's behavior and interactions based on ethical
standards, one's values, and social norms; evaluating consequences of an action and
making decisions with that in mind
Summary
Throughout all ﬁve competencies, students are learning to advocate for themselves
and others while further understanding their own identity, strengths and limitations,
and live a life in line with their values and goals.

Creating rules or skills based on expectations for positive health and wellbeing may feel like the
most challenging out of the three kinds of expectations. In many ways, it is easier to measure
students meeting the expectation of “Be Safe” by properly and safely handling equipment in the
science lab than it is to measure students being safe by not caving-in to inappropriate peer
pressure. 
Practically, setting schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing is done through
curricula, but don't worry. You’re not alone in the process of drafting curriculum for schoolwide
expectations for positive health and wellbeing. Not only do you have your team, but you also
have the rich curricula recognized by South Carolina’s Department of Education! 
While you’ll learn more about speciﬁc lessons, activities, or exercises to use for positive health
and wellbeing in both the upcoming lesson on wellness and in Tier 2, the curriculum and tools
you decide on ahead of time is foundational. Let’s review three of those now, one for each
school level!

Positive Health and Wellbeing Resources
First 20 Days of School for 3rd and 4th Grade Elementary Students
A method for setting schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing can be to
implement speciﬁc lessons regarding each area of competency. An example of this is the
curriculum developed by the South Carolina Department of Education for 3rd and 4th graders'
ﬁrst 20 days back in school.
Lesson plans with speciﬁc activities are developed for each of the 20 days. The lesson plans are
allocated across competency areas, and include instructions, resources, and reﬂection
opportunities. You will cover methods teachers can use to adapt lesson plans for their speciﬁc
classrooms in Tier 2, but it is important to ground the lesson plans in the previously decided
upon curriculum to ensure consistency across the principles being taught. 
Here are a few examples of lesson plans that revolve around interactive reading activities!
I'M  ALL EARS: This reading activity focuses on teaching students relationship-management skills. The teacher
reads Howard B. Wigglebottom Learns to Listen, and pauses throughout to discuss what happens
when Howard does or does not listen. Recommendations to make the reading more tangible
include creating a cause-and-effect chart of what happens when Howard doesn't listen compared
to when he does. Students are then encouraged to talk about a time when they didn't listen and
what the outcome was, and talk about strategies they can use to listen to one another in the
classroom.
SAME BUT DIFFERENT:This activity focuses on expanding students' social awareness. South Carolina's Department of
Education recommends different books for this, includingSkin Like Mineby Latashia Perry or
Same, Same But Differentby Jenny Sue Kostecki-Shaw. The teacher leads a discussion about
people from different cultures, backgrounds, and abilities. Students can discuss or journal about
where they are from and what they like to do and can be grouped into pairs or smaller groups to
discuss how they are similar and different.
MANAGING EMOTIONS:Students learn more about self-management in this activity where the teacher reads When Sophie
Gets Angry...Really, Really Angry....by Molly Bang. The goal of reading about emotions is to teach
students how to name emotions as well as how to manage them so that they don't hurt themselves
or other people. Teachers can display other emotion words for "anger" and ask students how they
physically feel when they're angry. Students can then write about how they can manage anger in
different settings, like the home, school, or a friend's house. In groups, students can discuss a
time they were angry, what prompted it, and how they managed it.

Character Playbook for Middle Schoolers
Districts in South Carolina, along with CASEL, have partnered with EVERFI for many years. Your
own district may be using EVERFI already! EVERFI offers 20 free courses designed for students
on a multitude of different positive health and wellbeing topics for middle and high schoolers. It
also includes courses on ﬁnancial literacy.
One of the courses for middle schoolers is called, "Character Playbook".
EVERFI
Character Playbook - Healthy Relationships | EVERFI
Character Playbook is an innovative digital character education program that
uses engaging social-emotional learning activities to educate students about
cultivating and maintaining healthy relationships during their critical middle
school and high school years. Character Playbook is composed of ﬁve modules
that cover key concepts around positive character development, social-
emotional learning (SEL), and building healthy relationships, based on the
CASEL standards for SEL.

This two hour course involves a digital character education program where students work
through real life scenarios. Students go through the key concepts previously mentioned: self-
awareness, social awareness, self-management, relationship skills, and responsible decision
making!
See the images from EVREFI's website that showcase some of the scenarios students work
through!
IMAGE HERE
Images from EVERFI's Character Playbook, titled "How Are You Feeling?"
IMAGE HERE
Images from EVERFI's Character Playbook, Titled "It's All About You!"
IMAGE HERE
Images from EVERFI's Character Playbook, Titled "Let's Talk about Relationships!"
Understanding Mental Wellness for High Schoolers

For high school students, courses regarding positive health and wellbeing can go more in depth
than younger grades to match their developmental level. South Carolina's Department of
Education puts EVERFI courses at the forefront of its recommendations. Here's a review of one
of their courses, “Understanding Mental Wellness”!
EVERFI
Understanding Mental Wellness | EVERFI
Like our physical health, our mental health can be strengthened or diminished
through daily habits. Understanding Mental Wellness introduces students to
the topic of mental health and the ways in which they can implement coping
strategies to manage their own challenging thoughts, emotions, and behaviors.
READ MORE EVERFI 
This holds six lessons that take a total of an hour to an hour and a half. Students learn key
deﬁnitions, coping strategies, and how to offer and seek help. In the next lesson, you will learn
more about mental wellness yourself, as well as strategies to use with students!
PBIS and Positive Health and Wellbeing
While PBIS focuses primarily on behavior, its structure and resources can be adapted to creating
and implementing schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing! PBIS even
encourages this itself (PBIS, 2018).
Since PBIS is a form of MTSS, using PBIS to create schoolwide expectations about positive
health and wellbeing involves doing what you’re already doing—relying on data to see what
competencies need extra teaching and working within your team! The extra step is applying the
competencies you want to emphasize in your schools to the PBIS matrix.
Similar to specifying behavioral descriptors under each value per school context, describe
activities or attitudes students can demonstrate for each positive health and wellbeing
competency. See the image below for an example; if you need to enlarge it, just click on it!
TABLE HERE
Table of positive health and Wellbeing; Rules are in Italics and Outlined
As with behavior, showing students positive health and wellbeing expectations involves explicit
instruction, reteaching throughout the year, providing opportunities to practice, and modeling
the expectations oneself. In the lesson on enhancing wellness, you’ll learn more practical steps
to enhance and maintain your and your students' positive health and wellbeing! 
Positive Health and Wellbeing for Families and
Caregivers
When building schoolwide expectations for positive health and wellbeing, it is important to
partner with families to decide the skills that are especially needed within the student body and
how schools can support practices in the home and vice versa. This communicates that the
school cares about more than just academics, ultimately contributing to a foundational
relationship between the families and schools. This supports students' wellbeing through all
tiers!
General Resources
As we acknowledged earlier, creating expectations for positive health and wellbeing is not easy.
It is distinct from academic and behavioral expectations in that it is harder to quantify or
materialize what positive health and wellbeing actually looks like. Here, we've gathered
resources for you to analyze and consider, whether as a jumping off point or for your end goal.
South Carolina Department of Education EVERFI
Instructions
"EVERFI is an invaluable resource for our students as a method for engaging
instruction because of its relevant and authentic application to students' lives.
Students grow as a result of this program in extremely positive ways - both in
their understanding of ﬁnancial literacy and their interest in the subject
matter."

Implementing Expectations
Putting the Expectations into Place
You’ve done the work. You met with your team, examined data, coordinated with parents, spoke
to students, drafted your expectations matrices, and decided upon your positive health and
wellbeing lesson plans—now what? 
Implementing expectations starts with visibility.
It is important for students and staff to see what the expectations are in each context. This can
be done by using posters of your matrices in the appropriate contexts. This is a great
opportunity to involve students! Have younger students craft posters using markers, glitter, and
other fun tools! Alternatively, get a stuffed animal that matches your mascot and let students
take it home each weekend and discuss how the mascot implemented school values at home.
Older students can create videos discussing one particular expectation or rule that is played
during morning announcements, or even create a website or web content that is posted
through the school’s own homepage. 

As mentioned before, students need time to learn expectations. You can take the ﬁrst two weeks
of an academic year and focus on teaching students in your classroom the expectations and the
speciﬁc actions to follow them. This can be done differently at each developmental level:
elementary age students may need more deﬁnitions, examples and non-examples, and memory
refreshers while high schoolers may do well with a section in the syllabus dedicated to
expectations and a quiz on it during their ﬁrst week. Reviewing expectations after winter break
is another preventive strategy to ensure that expectations are not just seen but understood!
Benchmarks of Quality and Expectations
To assess your school’s creation and implementation of expectations, you can use the
Benchmarks of Quality assessment. While the Benchmarks of Quality goes over vital elements
PBIS implementation, you can use the section on expectations to assess how your school is
creating and implementing them! Here is a brief overview of relevant critical elements of the
Benchmarks of Quality:
TABLE HERE
You can use these guidelines as goalposts when developing and implementing expectations.
Once expectations are created and in place, how do you respond to students when expectations
are met or unmet? You’ll learn more in the very next section! 

Responding to Expectations Through Relationships
How Students Are Reinforced
Knowing how to respond when students meet our expectations and follow the rules, or when
they don’t, can be tricky. Reinforcements are important; they can encourage forming positive
habits or prevent ineffective or unhelpful behaviors from becoming routine. Reinforcements are
needed in everyday life, including school, but understanding how to implement them, however,
is less straight-forward. 
This tension is demonstrated clearly in how teachers' and students' perceive a common form
of reinforcement through PBIS (Llyod et al., 2022; Tidewell, 2022). 
Read through how teachers and students feel about reinforcement systems in the graphic
below! You can enlarge it by clicking on it.
IMAGE HERE
Graphic of students' and teachers' view on reinforcement systems in the classroom
As you can see, the pros or cons of reinforcing through rewards, “cash,” or tokens are divided.
Some of these issues can be tackled, such as ensuring well-rounded, deﬁned training for
teachers on behaviors and attitudes to reward or involving students more closely in the process.
However, this does not address students’ and staff’s motivation to engage in the system, or
how reinforcement can matter to all students. 
There are no easy answers on implementing reinforcements. Nevertheless, there are key
principles to keep in mind that can lessen the diffculties associated with reinforcement
systems. 

Reinforcing Through Relationship
All reinforcements require relationship. Think back on a time in your life when someone, maybe
a parent, teacher, or boss, either corrected or commended your behavior or work. What
difference did the closeness, trust, and respect you had for that person make in how you
perceived their response? If you didn't know the person, their response was most likely just a
nice affrmation or a pesky admonishment. It takes relationship for reinforcements to stick or
to matter.
If your students do not know that they are cared for as people,
regardless of behavior or attitudes, then reinforcements, whether
tangible or verbal, will not impact their motivation and character.
Within schoolwide expectations, what matters in reinforcement is the person responding, not
necessarily the reinforcement itself. Build your relationships with your students so that when
reinforcement or intervention occurs, it matters. A way to build relationships with students can
occur through “5 Minute Chats with Students” from CASEL. 

Keeping Reinforcements Clear
The deﬁnitions for misconduct, reinforcement, and intervention ought to be clearly deﬁned
and well known by staffs and students. An example of a well-outlined dictionary of misconduct
and intervention is found in the attached Behavioral Standards from a school district in
California.
For example, hazing is deﬁned as:
"Any method of initiation into a student organization or group that causes or may cause
physical harm or personal degradation or disgrace resulting in physical or mental harm to
a student."
One of the outlined responses to hazing, as a minimum standard, is an informal conference.
This is clearly deﬁned as:
"A school offfcial (teacher, administrator or counselor) will meet with the student for
instruction & guidance providing reteaching and corrective feedback. This may offer the
student an opportunity to have an understanding of, and be motivated to change, his or
her behavior. A student so involved is more likely to become re-engaged in the process of
learning."
There are multiple examples in the document below that you can use as tools to think through
how you deﬁne behaviors and reactions in your own school.
Having such clear deﬁnitions prevents ambiguity when making decisions about responding to
students. A helpful tool your school may already have, or you can create within your leadership
team is a chart that connects speciﬁc types of misconduct with appropriate responses based on
the action, its severity, ﬁrst time occurrence, or repeated instances.

Equity in Responses
Racial minority students, especially Black students, face far more offce discipline referrals than
their peers. To work against this inequity, data regarding disciplinary action should be
disaggregated by race, gender, ethnicity, and disability to monitor trends. Having clearly deﬁned
expectations for behavior and clearly deﬁned procedures for misconduct further pushes against
bias in disciplinary actions.
For more tips, see the attached 5-Point Intervention Approach for Enhancing Equity in School
Discipline from PBIS. You can ﬁnd additional material on disproportionality in the Core MTSS
Course.
You have covered a broad but important topic in this lesson. The expectations in schools provide
structure for learning to ﬂourish and relationships to grow in a predictable, safe, and
welcoming environment. Let’s return to Dr. Jake Klipsch (See? We did come back to him!) to
hear how you can respond to this new information. 
Academic, behavioral, and positive health and wellbeing
expectations are important because they encompass
distinct parts of our students that collectively create the
whole person.
Creating and implementing schoolwide expectations in Tier 1 is a journey instead of a
destination. It is important that you have a team working alongside you. 

Let's review the lesson.
- Expectations for students and staff are important because they give everyone a
common language to use about academics, behavior, and positive health and
wellbeing.
- Academic expectations are set by South Carolina's Department of Education, while
behavioral and positive health and wellbeing expectations are set by teams within
your school and district.
- Behavioral expectations are three to ﬁve positively stated expectations that have
associated, context-speciﬁc rules.
- Positive health and wellbeing expectations are rooted in curricula and lesson plans
to implement in your school.
- When responding to students who meet or don't meet expectations, focus on the
relationship ﬁrst, have clearly deﬁned responses, and ensure that equity is the
priority.




*****
Building the Foundation with Tier 1- 1.3
Wellness Enhancement for School Staff
Wellness Enhancement for Students

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Wellness Enhancement for School Staff
Outcomes:
1. Describe wellness and some of the challenges to wellness that educators may face
2. Recommend effective supports for districts to prioritize educator wellbeing, reduce
stress, and promote positive school wellness
3. Identify wellness practices that individuals can adopt to increase wellbeing

What is Wellness?
Examining Wellness in the School Setting
A white building with many windows and balconies
Wellness is the act of practicing healthy habits on a daily basis to attain better physical and
mental outcomes. It is the active pursuit of activities, choices, and lifestyles that lead to a state of
holistic health—wellness is not just surviving; it means thriving. 
School wellness is an approach that actively supports the physical, mental, social, and
emotional health of everyone in the school community.
A healthy school has a culture and environment where the importance of health and overall
wellness is visible on the walls and in every classroom—the importance of overall wellness is
supported and promoted in all aspects of the school.
At the Tier 1 level, promoting wellness for all provides a strong foundation to continue building
on.

Components of Educator Wellness
Wellness is important for both educators and students. In this lesson, you will focus on
wellness for educators: teachers, administrators, mental health clinicians, and any other staff
working in a school.
Educator wellness is about the combination of our love for what we do each day, the quality of
our relationships, the security of our ﬁnances, the vibrancy of our physical health, and the pride
we take in what we have contributed to our communities (Rath & Harter, 2014). Most
importantly, it’s about how these dimensions interact.
Click through the images below for more information
about the eight dimensions of educator wellness.

Dimensions of Educator Wellness
Educator wellness can be deﬁned along eight dimensions described by the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA): emotional,
environmental, intellectual, physical, social, spiritual, occupational, and ﬁnancial.
Dimension 1
Emotional
Emotional wellness is the ability to successfully handle life's stresses and adapt to
change and diffcult times (National Institutes of Health, 2022).
Individuals who are emotionally well experience fewer negative emotions and bounce
back from diffculties faster. This quality is called resilience.
Emotional wellness is of major importance in an educator’s daily life because it
affects interactions with students, parents, colleagues, and administrators.
Educators can achieve emotional management and wellness through individual
activities that allow for self-reﬂection and processing as well as maintaining
connections with friends who are active listeners, trusted colleagues, mentors,
coaches, or professionals who are trained in emotional wellness strategies.
Counseling can give the educator a safe space with a neutral party to make sense of
emotions and gain clarity on how to make necessary life adjustments.
Dimension 2
Physical
Educators often feel so extended by the day-to-day demands of their professional
and personal lives that they don’t make time for physical wellness. Educators who
have a depleted sense of physical wellness are more susceptible to physical and
mental illness, which has a direct inﬂuence on attendance, relationships, and capacity
to serve students. In turn, this can have a negative impact on other educators and their
ability to serve students.
Dimension 3
Intellectual
Just like your physical and emotional health, your intellect needs nourishment too!
Intellectual wellbeing is a sense of curiosity, being open to new ideas, thinking
critically, and being an overall lifelong learner. The pursuit of one’s intellectual
passion is essential for educators’ relational and instructional engagement with
students. It helps them stay current with evolving research and follow through with
emerging best practices.
Dimension 4
Environmental
Environmental wellness establishes the physical and mental foundation that grounds
an educator’s work, including the physical and emotional environment. Contributors
to environmental wellness in the school setting include the safety and upkeep of the
building, the culture of staff and students, and the sustainability of practices.
Dimension 5
Social
Social wellness refers to developing a sense of connection, belonging, and a well-
developed support system.
Positive social habits help us build support systems and stay healthier mentally and
physically.
Social wellness provides educators with the foundation for interaction and
participation with and commitment to students, parents, and the community that is
rooted in mutual respect, interdependence, and cooperation (Sackney et al., 2000;
Strout & Howard, 2012).
Dimension 6
Spiritual
Spiritual wellness represents personal beliefs and values and involves having a
purpose and a sense of balance and peace. Spiritual wellness allows educators to ﬁnd
their purpose and passion within the profession, enabling them to serve students
equitably. Spiritual wellness is unique to each individual in how they will cultivate the
understanding to support this dimension. Educators can create the space for
deepening their spiritual wellness by examining individual aspirations and analyzing
recurring patterns through reﬂective journaling, meditation, and introspective
mindfulness.
Dimension 7
Occupational
Occupational wellness includes job satisfaction, the ability to use your talents and
skills at work, and your ambitions for professional growth and change. People with
occupational wellness ﬁnd their work rewarding, have good relationships with co-
workers, and ﬁnd positive ways to handle workplace stress, all while also ﬁnding a
good work-life balance.
Dimension 8
Financial
Financial wellness has a direct effect on educators’ ability to support their life, health,
and mental wellbeing. If an individual is under ﬁnancial stress, this occupies an
overwhelming amount of an individual’s mental capacity, preventing educators from
being fully mindful and critically conscious in their instructional practices and
relationships.

Why is a more intentional focus on school wellness so
important?
Airplane window view
Often, educators put students and families ﬁrst. As educators, after all, the goal is to support
students as much as we can. Sometimes, self-care can feel like it's taking away time from taking
care of others, and it can even feel selﬁsh.
However, personal wellness is needed in order to effectively help others. You may be familiar
with the metaphor of ﬂying on an airplane and being told to put on your oxygen mask ﬁrst
before helping others. This is because if your oxygen mask isn't on, you will be unable to
breathe and provide support to anyone else. You may also be familiar with the phrase "you
cannot pour from an empty cup." Similarly, we cannot be fully present and giving to others if we
are running on empty.
The same concept is true in the school setting: wellness helps educators perform roles more
effectively, ﬁnd more satisfaction at work, and create a positive environment, improving the
experience for educators and students alike.

Barriers to Educator Wellness
While we often acknowledge the importance of wellness, maintaining it is not always easy.
There are many barriers to wellness that professionals in the school setting experience.
According to several studies and reports, teaching is a highly stressful job. For example, the
American Federation of Teachers’ 2017 Educator Quality of Work Life Survey found that 61% of
teachers said their jobs were always or often stressful—more than double the rate of non-
teaching working adults—and 58% said they had poor mental health due to stress levels. That
was before the COVID-19 pandemic hit.
In another study, researchers conducted surveys in January 2022 with public school teachers,
principals, and working adults, asking about the following ﬁve aspects of wellbeing:  
- Frequent job-related stress
- Ability to cope with job-related stress
- Burnout, symptoms of depression
- Resilience to stressful events
The image below depicts the results from the survey. Click to enlarge.
IMAGE HERE
A chart depicting wellbeing survey results
As can be seen from the chart, compared to other working adults, teachers and principals
reported experiencing greater rates of frequent job-related stress, burnout, symptoms of
depression, and not coping well with job-related stress: almost 75% of teachers and 85% of
principals experience frequent job-related stress, compared to 35% of other working adults
(Rand Corp, 2022). Meanwhile, compared to teachers and principals, other working adults
reported experiencing higher resilience.

Resilience:the process and outcome of successfully adapting to difffcult or challenging life
experiences, especially through mental, emotional, and behavioral ffexibility and
adjustment to external and internal demands (American Psychological Association, 2023).
A number of factors contribute to how well people adapt to adversities, predominant
among them:
the ways in which individuals view and engage with the world
the availability and quality of social resources
speciffc coping strategies
What’s going on? Why are educators experiencing such diffculties with their occupation?
Educators love what they do, but some are ﬁnding it harder and harder to "bounce back" from
so many demanding and stressful events. Let's take a closer look at major underlying issues.
“Teaching never stops, says Samantha T., a special
education teacher in West Virginia. "I don’t recall the last
time I got a full lunch break—without behavior check-
ins, a parent phone call, or the extra coverage needed due
to lack of subs. Instead of planning periods, when the bell
rings at 3:30, and students go home, my grading and
planning work is far from ﬁnished”
- NEA.com, 2022

Educators report that their stress is often related to increased job demands—especially around:
- testing and assessments
- challenging student behaviors
- a lack of decision-making power
- insuffcient professional development in social and emotional learning
to support students' needs
These factors, along with other various concerns, can lead to secondary traumatic stress (STS),
burnout, and compassion fatigue. Let's review more about these challenges to wellness in the
tabs below.
Secondary traumatic stress: Secondary traumatic stress (STS) is the emotional distress that results when an individual hears
about the traumatic experiences of another individual. Distress may result from hearing
someone’s trauma stories, seeing high levels of distress in the aftermath of a traumatic event,
retelling a traumatized person's story, and/or seeing photos or images related to the trauma.
Common symptoms of STS include the following (click on image to enlarge):
Burnout: Burnout is characterized by emotional exhaustion and a sense of reduced personal
accomplishment. Burnout has similar symptoms to STS, but can result from other stressors
besides trauma exposure, like feeling overloaded with responsibilities, not having enough time, or
not having enough resources. Click on the image below to enlarge and see warning signs of
educator burnout out.
IMAGE HERE
Compassion Fatigue: A combination of STS and burnout can result in compassion fatigue. Compassion fatigue refers
to occupational exhaustion and stress that results from absorbing the trauma and emotions
associated with helping others. Compassion fatigue can make it diffcult to continue empathizing
with others, cause physical symptoms, and increase the risk of developing mental health
disorders. Review the symptoms of compassion fatigue in the graphic below. Click to enlarge.
IMAGE HERE

How to Support Educator Wellness: Shared Responsibility
Teacher burnout is a problem that can be addressed at the individual and district/school
leadership levels. At the individual level, there’s a range of things that you can do to improve
your own wellbeing, called self-care. Self-care often is, and should be, encouraged: it is
important to consider your own wellbeing and take steps to actively support it. We will review
strategies for self-care later in the lesson. 
However, self-care alone is often not enough to overcome the many challenges faced in the
school setting, many of which may be out of the control of individual educators. It is important
to acknowledge that the responsibility is not solely on educators; self-care may feel like yet
another burden or task to complete. Leadership, both at the district and school levels, plays a
large role in creating environments that impact the wellness of faculty, staff, and students. For
example, decisions about funding allocation, classroom sizes, school policies, and much more
can make a signiﬁcant impact on the school environment and the rate of burnout that teachers
experience.
Because of this, there is a shared responsibility between educators and school leadership in
promoting educator wellness. Leadership can promote policies that facilitate wellness, and
individual educators can take action to support their wellbeing. 
Brandi explains that districts and schools have a responsibility to examine organizational
systems, practices, and policies to identify and organize resources in ways that effectively
promote educator wellness. While individual educators and schools can both make steps
forward in promoting wellness, it is essential that this is done together so that needs are being
appropriately met.
Review the image below for examples of roles that
districts/schools and individuals can play in promoting
wellness.
IMAGER HERE

Best Practices to Support Educator Wellness
Integrating Tier 1 Support at the School Leadership Level
Let's look at teacher wellbeing strategies through an MTSS lens. Your school is already (or is
about to be) invested in MTSS and PBIS to address the academic social, emotional, and
behavioral needs of all students. The PBIS framework also offers an approach to implementing
tiered supports for staff. PBIS promotes a proactive, preventative approach by emphasizing the
use of a continuum of evidence-based social, emotional, and mental health supports. Teams
addressing the mental health and social emotional, and behavioral needs of their students
might also address and support the needs of their staff.
Through this MTSS rationale and the implementation process below, districts can support staff
with varying challenges and needs.
IMAGE HERE
Wellness plan and six-step process

MTSS Action Plan
Using MTSS for educator wellness includes three keyshifts in strategy, collaboration, and data.
1. Shift in Strategy: Focus on universal prevention to promote wellness for all.Start with small,
practical goals and action plan steps that are attainable and make a big impact on overall
wellness 
2. Shift Collaboration: Leadership teams meet regularly and use data and the MTSS to organize
systems, practices, and data enhancements to prioritize wellness for educators and students.
3. Shift in Data Use in Decision-Making: Use large data sets (aggregate) at the universal level to
guide implementation decisions, and make sure the team has appropriate data to promote
wellness for educators and students. Universal data from surveys and focus groups will guide
teams to identify staff needs and develop systems of support.
Universal indicators of wellness include the percentage of staff who feel like they: 
- are connected (within grade level/team and/or school level) 
- are managing their changing role 
- have skills to manage student needs
- can manage their current workload 
- have a voice at the table with school, district, state
are appreciated by students, families, administration, central offce
Seeking Feedback
Feedback is a great way to identify opportunities to provide immediate and future support. To get
educator feedback,a systematicteacher and staff assessment process can help districts and
schools identify areas to improve wellness and reduce stress to ultimately promote success for
all.
Within the MTSS, districts can do these ﬁve things:
1. Establish a clear process and system for collecting, analyzing, and storing data 
2. Conduct wellbeing assessments with teachers and all school staff 
3. Assess staff wellbeing regularly(at least annually)
4. Ensure privacy of information and anonymity when assessing staff wellbeing
5. Assess a range of wellbeing components that address each of the eight dimensions
of wellness

Districts can obtain valuable insight into educator needs by using one-on-one interviews
and/or:
School-Based Surveys –
When using scale-based surveys, select a measurement tool that is valid and reliable and that is
connected to the outcomes you are striving to measure. For example, some tools speciﬁcally
measure things like work-related stress levels, and some tools may focus on other aspects of
wellbeing, like connectedness and teacher effcacy. Examples of tools to measure work-related
dimensions are listed below and include links to the websites.
1. Resilience at Work Scale(RAW), is a 25-item scale intended to capture “resilience
promoting” behaviors and measure the way individuals manage the pressures of work
(Winwood et al., 2013). RAW measures seven aspects of workplace resilience (which are
teachable) and helps to expand opportunities to provide support and nurture employee
resilience.
2. Professional Quality of Life (PROQOL): Includes 30 items to assess compassion satisfaction
and fatigue. Click here for the free complete questionnaire.
3. Health-Related Quality of Life:Developed by the CDC, the HRQOL has 4 questions in the
Healthy Days Core Module and 10 additional questions about activity limitations and healthy
days symptoms. HRQOL is an individual’s or a group’s perceived physical and mental health
over time.
4. Teacher Subjective Well-Being Questionnaire: The Teacher Subjective Wellbeing
Questionnaire is an 8-item self-report rating scales for measuring teachers' job-speciﬁc
wellbeing. It's comprised of two subscales: (1) School Connectedness and (2) Teaching
Effcacy. Subscale scores can be used a standalone wellbeing indicators or summed to create
an Overall Teacher Subjective Wellbeing composite score.

Focus Groups –
A focus group is an information-gathering tool where a selected group of 6-12 people have a
focused discussion on a particular topic. This discussion is guided by a school staff member
acting as a facilitator who asks up to 12 questions. The discussion lasts for 40–80 minutes. A
record keeper documents issues and views raised. School policy regarding data protection should
be adhered to when recording discussions. Generally focus groups meet once only. 

Using measurement tools, schools and districts can build an understanding of teachers'
professional experiences in a number of areas. By gathering educator perceptions of their
wellness, schools can assess the quality of the work environment and develop targeted
programs and professional development that address wellbeing and job satisfaction.
Review the graphic below for components of the teacher
experiences that these surveys may measure.
IMAGE HERE
Graphic listing areas that can be measured to help schools and districts understand
teacher experiences

When districts and school systems engage in the educator wellness assessment processes it is
important to remember these key facts:
- There is no one right way to measure wellness. Use what you know about your context to inform your choice.
- Your resources will affect how often you measure.
- Each measure should be focused on an aspect of wellbeing that you can inﬂuence through interventions.
- Be prepared to act on what you learn.
- Use results from multiple measures to get as much information as possible.
Also, when using a tool, such as a survey or interview protocol, communicate a clear goal to
participants, share how results may be used, and provide a process for protecting
conﬁdentiality. These practices may increase participant trust and willingness to share their
experiences. And as a reminder:
- Consider the purpose of each measure
- Choose a tool that is considerate of your workplace and community culture
- Align staff wellness improvement efforts with needs identiﬁed by your staff wellbeing assessment
- Integrate wellness activities into the school culture instead of after-school activities
When conducting wellbeing assessments, districts must consider the goal, scale, and length of
the survey during the planning process. Open communication with educators and diligent
collection of data on teachers’ professional concerns allows school and district leaders to more
accurately identify and address the root causes of teachers’ stress and dissatisfaction.
For a review of wellness measures that provide districts with an organized view of instruments,
dimensions, and an accompanying glossary, download the PDF titled "Wellbeing Measures."
Wellbeing Measures.pdf
TAKE A LOOK

Taking Action: Applying Educator Feedback
Once data is collected, schools and districts have many options for wellness initiatives. There
are a variety of options to choose from, so it is essential to tie practices back to the input of
educators and what will best serve the needs of each speciﬁc community. In this section, we will
review some of these options.
Wellness Rooms
An example of a school-basedwellness room for staff and students.
Wellness roomsprovide a calming and restorative space for teachers and staff to practice
mindfulness and self-care during breaks. Ideally, these rooms remove offce equipment or
work-related supplies and foster community building, healthy eating, and relaxation. For
example, wellness rooms may include a large table to encourage staff to eat together and
converse or a wall of photos highlighting staff engaging in group outings and healthy activities.
It should be noted that some teachers disagree with creating wellness rooms and believe they
send negative messages (e.g., teaching is so stressful and taxing that teachers need a
therapeutic space to perform their job). Click here to read about one company that supports the
design of educator wellness rooms.

Mindfulness-Based Interventions and Professional Development (PD)
Mindfulness-based interventions and PD effectively reduce stress and teacher burnout by
developing staff members’ mental health tools and practices.
Providing opportunities for professional development in mindfulness is a great way districts can
support educator wellness.
Below are three mindfulness-based professional development programs that demonstrate
effectiveness in supporting educator wellness: Cultivating Awareness and Resilience in
Education (CARE), Community Approach to Learning Mindfully (CALM), and Stress
Management and Relaxation Techniques (SMART) in Education.
Cultivating Awareness and Resilience in Education (CARE). CARE is a 3-4-day professional
development program that helps teachers handle the stresses and rediscover the joys of
teaching. CARE offers teachers and administrators tools and resources for reducing stress,
preventing burnout, enlivening teaching and helping students thrive socially, emotionally and
academically. This program has been carefully studied in a series of randomized trials showing
its effectiveness in boosting teacher’s mental capacities, performance, and social and emotional
functioning which results in more rewarding personal and professional experiences.
CARE can be provided:
- face-to-face at local school districts (a series of days across the school year)
- as a series of shorter workshops across the school year.
- yearly at the Garrison Institute (a four-day retreat model).
CARE can be tailored to the needs of your school or district.
Community Approach to Learning Mindfully (CALM). CALM is an evidence-based program that
provides space and time to support educators daily wellbeing mindfully. Educators are trained to
engage in daily CALM sessions before the school day begins that last about 20 minutes and
provide intentional breathing practices, gentle yoga movement, mindful awareness practices,
and setting positive intentions for the teaching day. CALM was associated with improvements in
mindfulness, emotional functioning, positive affect, distress tolerance, blood pressure, cortisol,
and effcacy in classroom management (Harris, et al., 2016).
Stress Management and Relaxation Techniques in Education (SMART). SMART focuses on
supporting the mental, emotional, and physical wellbeing of educators through the cultivation
of emotional competencies, self-compassion, and mindfulness. The 20-hour evidence-based
personal renewal program is designed especially for adults working in ECE-12 education. Over
ten weeks, participants attend two-hour weekly sessions that include presentations,
discussion, and experiential activities involving movement, emotional awareness, and
meditation. Educators who have completed the program reported decreased stress, anxiety,
depression and burnout, and increased working memory capacity, greater mindfulness and
levels of self-compassion, and more focused attention (Roeser, et al., 2013).
Teachers can improve communication, classroom management, and student learning by
expanding and implementing mindfulness practice through these or other training programs.

Wellness Groups
Cohorts of wellness groups support teacher and staff mental health through peer consultation
groups and group therapy interventions. Districts may support wellness groups by matching
each group with a third-party facilitator or having a staff member receive training to lead
conversations. For example:
Happy Teacher Revolutionsupports the mental health and wellness of teachers. They provide
training to initiate teacher support group meetings in communities around the country. During
these optional group meetings, participants may practice mindfulness, eat healthy meals
together, engage in physical activities or sports, or discuss successes, challenges, and
experiences. The resource also helps districts provide group therapy opportunities for staff interested
in more structured Tier 2 support.

Self-Care and Beyond
Individual Strategies for Improving Wellness
Now that we have reviewed the school/district level initiatives for improving wellness, let's
discuss some strategies that educators can apply to improve their personal wellness. When
reviewing these strategies, it is important to note that not every strategy will work for every
person–resources, schedules, and personal needs make a signiﬁcant difference in what
approaches will work best. Make sure to individualize your own personal wellness plan based on
your own strengths, resources, and needs!
Emotional Intelligence as a Tool for Wellness
Emotional intelligence (otherwise known as emotional quotient or EQ) is the ability to
understand, use, and manage your own emotions in positive ways to relieve stress,
communicate effectively, empathize with others, overcome challenges, and defuse conﬂict.
Emotional intelligence can help promote wellness by positively impacting relationships with
others, effectiveness at work, awareness of and management of emotions, and overall
wellbeing. Understanding emotional intelligence, and working to improve skills, can help
address some challenges in the school setting.
According to Daniel Goleman, an American psychologist
and author of the groundbreaking book, “Emotional
Intelligence,” (sometimes referred to as EI or EQ) has ffve
key elements:
Self-Awareness-The ability to recognize and understand your own emotions is a critical part of emotional
intelligence. Beyond just recognizing your emotions, however, is being aware of the effect of
your actions, moods, and emotions on other people. To become self-aware, you must be
capable of monitoring your own emotions, recognizing different emotional reactions, and
then correctly identifying each particular emotion. Self-aware individuals also recognize the
relationships between the things they feel and how they behave.
Self-Regulation-This is the ability to regulate and manage your emotions, which is not to say you are putting
emotions on lockdown and hiding your true feelings. It simply means waiting for the right
time and place to express them. Self-regulation is all about expressing your emotions
appropriately. Those who are skilled in self-regulation tend to be ﬂexible and adapt well to
change. They are also good at managing conﬂict and diffusing tense or diffcult situations.
Motivation-Intrinsic motivation also plays a key role in emotional intelligence. People who are
emotionally intelligent are motivated by things beyond external rewards like fame, money,
recognition, and acclaim. Instead, they have a passion to fulﬁll their own inner needs and
goals. They seek internal rewards, experience ﬂow from being totally in tune with an activity
and pursue peak experiences.
Empathy-Being empathetic—or having the ability to understand how others are feeling—is absolutely
crucial to emotional intelligence. But it involves more than just being able to recognize the
emotional states of others. It also involves your responses to people based on this
information. When you sense that someone is feeling bad, depressed, or disheartened, how
do you respond? You might treat them with extra care and concern, or you might try to lift
their spirits.
Social Skills-Being able to interact well with others is another important aspect of emotional intelligence.
True emotional understanding involves more than just consideration of your own emotions
and those of others. You also need to be able to put this information to work in your daily
interactions and communications. In professional settings, managers beneﬁt by being able
to build relationships and connections with employees. Workers beneﬁt from being able to
develop a strong rapport with leaders and co-workers. Important social skills include active
listening, verbal communication skills, nonverbal communication skills, leadership, and
persuasiveness.
Remember, emotional intelligence helps you build stronger relationships, succeed in your
workplace, and achieve your career and personal goals. It can also help you to connect with your
feelings, turn intention into action, and make informed decisions about what matters most to
you. Emotional intelligence affects:
1. Your performance at work.High emotional intelligence can
help you navigate the social complexities of the workplace,
lead and motivate others, and excel in your career.
Your physical health. If you're unable to manage your emotions, you are probably
not managing your stress either. This can lead to serious health problems.
Uncontrolled stress raises blood pressure, suppresses the immune system,
increases the risk of heart attacks and strokes, contributes to infertility, and speeds
up the aging process. The ﬁrst step to improving emotional intelligence is to learn
how to manage stress.
2. Your mental health. Uncontrolled emotions and stress can also impact your mental
health, making you vulnerable to anxiety and depression. If you are unable to
understand, get comfortable with, or manage your emotions, you'll also struggle to
form strong relationships. This in turn can leave you feeling lonely and isolated and
further exacerbate mental health problems.
3. Your relationships. By understanding your emotions and how to control them,
you're better able to express how you feel and understand how others are feeling.
This allows you to communicate more effectively and forge stronger relationships,
both at work and in your personal life.
4. Your social intelligence. Being in tune with your emotions serves a social purpose,
connecting you to other people and the world around you. Social intelligence
enables you to reduce stress and balance your nervous system through social
communication, and connection with others.
Knowledge of emotional intelligence and the ability to positively act on it are not the same. It's
important to remember that there is a difference between having knowledge and consciously
applying that knowledge to your life. Even though you know, being stressed and overwhelmed
can override your ability to act on your knowledge. In order to consistently engage your
awareness in ways that stand up under pressure, you can develop or enhance the skills to
overcome stress in the moment.
By enhancing emotional intelligence, each educator can become more productive and
successful at what they do, and help students become more productive and successful too!
The way teachers shape and handle their own feelings and
those of their learners is central to the success of learning.
Alan Mortiboys, Teaching with Emotional Intelligence
If you would like to explore strengthening your
emotional intelligence, click the link and download the
resource provided below.
13 Emotional Intelligence Activities, Exercises & PDFs
This piece offers a useful next step for anyone interested in enhancing their
emotional intelligence activities and need a plan for improving their own EI.
READ MORE POSITIVEPSYCHOLOGY.COM 
Understanding and Developing Emotional Intelligence.pdf
200 KB

Self-Care Activities
Because every person’s schedule and speciﬁc needs are different, practicing self-care can look
different for everyone. A list of self-care activities for teachers could include the following
ideas:
-Take a 10-20 minute break each day for just yourself
-Provide positive affrmations to increase conﬁdence and improve self-image
-Bring a self-care "emergency pack" to school with things you enjoy so you can destress during your break if needed
-Use journals or writing to help recognize and process emotions
-Take a 20-30 minute walk or participate in other physical activities
-Apply mindfulness strategies, such as meditation
-Utilize social support from colleagues, friends, family, and signiﬁcant others
The National Education Association developed Put on Your Own Oxygen Mask First: Cultivating
Healing and Wellbeing in Ourselves,a 7-part series about reconnecting and recharging as
foundational for humanizing your work and precursors to teaching and learning whether that
be with kids or adults. To access part 1 of this series provided by the South Carolina Education
Association (SCEA), click the link below. You can navigate through the site to view all 7 parts
along with tons of other useful resources!
Put on Your Own Oxygen Mask First: Cultivating Healing and Wellbeing in
Ourselves (Part 1) | The SCEA
Put on Your Own Oxygen Mask First: Cultivating
Healing and Wellbeing in Ourselves (Part 1) | The SCEA
Reconnecting and recharging are foundational for humanizing our work and
precursors to teaching and learning whether that be with kids or adults.
READ MORE THESCEA 

Building Positive Relationships
Friends having coffee
It's all about connection.
Developing positive relationships with colleagues can also be rewarding. Teachers who report
positive connections with their colleagues have a sense of belonging and shared commitment.
In addition, according to Greater Good in Education (2022), teachers with strong connections:
say that their colleagues respect and trust each other
see their coworkers as accepting and encouraging, as well as
collaborative and supportive of each other’s success
feel that they can communicate openly with colleagues and go to them
for help if needed
Follow the link below for a list of strategies for building
positive relationships with colleagues.
Building Positive Relationships with Fellow Educators | NEA
Building Positive Relationships with Fellow Educators |
NEA
Simple steps to creating a more positive work environment.
READ MORE NEA 
Practicing self-care, being consciously aware of your
emotions, and building strong relationships are effective
ways you can promote your own wellness. Lastly and
arguably most importantly, you have to set boundaries.
Here are some tips from ResilientEducator.com:
Set Boundaries to Protect Your Peace
The time has come to put yourself ﬁrst. Teaching is a calling of the heart, but your
physical and mental wellbeing shouldn’t have to suffer to follow your passion. But
creating boundaries can be very hard. Here are just a few "doable" tips to assist with
creating boundaries.
Tip 1 Stick to a ffnite grading time.
It’s easy to lose hours to schoolwork, but too much time spent grading can lead to
burnout faster for you and less quality feedback for your students. Your mind gets
tired and you can become agitated. Feedback is important but, if it’s not quality,
there’s no point in getting it back quickly. Block out a couple of hours to work. And do
your work. However, when the time is up, wrap it up. Stick to that time frame.
On those rare nights when you ﬁnd yourself with less work to do, get ahead. Put
together those lesson plans for next week, or the week after. Stay on track and stay
consistent, but stay within a time limit.
Tip 2 Schedule student help hours
Determine a set schedule and encourage your students to come to you during those
times for help or questions.
Post the times you are free during the day and available after school to provide
support and guidance to your students. Let parents know that this is a good time for
phone calls or emails with a letter home and post on your school’s website.
Scheduling speciﬁc times in advance will ease the mind of your students and parents
while encouraging them to seek out your help.
Tip 3 Take non-negotiable breaks
Find time for yourself in your day and protect that like a mama bear guarding her
cubs.
A break will help you tackle the rest of the day.
Make your lunch adults-only
Choose one of your planning periods to be alone
Close your classroom door, go to the break room, or take a walk
It is important to do whatever is going to give you a break from the hectic nature of
the day. Some of these options may not be feasible everywhere; that’s totally okay!
What is important is to ﬁnd some time with yourself, or with other adults, in whatever
way works for you.


Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- Wellness refers to the health and wellbeing of everyone involved in the school
setting. Beyond the absence of health and other disorders or challenges, wellness
involves proactively thriving in your environment
- Prioritizing wellness makes educators more likely to stay in the profession,
increases quality of life, and, ultimately, makes a stronger school system
- Educators face many challenges in achieving wellness, and many strategies at the
leadership/policy level and at the individual level can help promote wellness
- Wellness strategies at the leadership level include regularly seeking and using
feedback from educators through surveys and/or focus groups, integrating
wellness activities, such as meditation, and using a tiered approach
- Wellness strategies at the individual level include using emotional intelligence
skills, engaging in self-care activities, and building strong relationships





@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Wellness Enhancement for Students
Outcomes:
1. Describe the ways in which Tier 1 can support student wellness
2. Examine physical wellness for students, including nutrition and physical activity
3. Examine emotional wellness and mental health promotion strategies for students

Supporting Student Wellness
Improving Wellness for All
Like the adults in the building, children coming to school also need to have their wellness
attended to.
To promote student wellness, schools, districts, and educational professionals must ﬁrst
recognize that there are many factors that impact a student’s academic attainment.
A healthy and supportive school environment helps children and adolescents develop the skills
they need to recognize and manage emotions, set and achieve positive goals, appreciate the
perspectives of others, establish and maintain positive relationships, and make responsible
decisions (CDC, Healthy Schools 2022).
School districts can help create a healthier generation by taking steps to promote proper
nutrition, physical health, and mental health.
Schools offer an important setting to educate students on the importance of a healthy mind
and body as part of the total learning experience and to encourage healthy behaviors that last
a lifetime.

Components of Student Wellness
Before looking at what schools can do to promote wellness in detail, let's examine the different
components of student wellness. Some of these components may be similar to the eight
dimensions of educator wellness discussed in the "Educator Wellness" lesson.
The Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child Model, WSCC, is a framework for
addressing wellness in schools that describes ten components for supporting student wellness.
The WSCC model is student-centered and emphasizes the role of the community in supporting
the school, the connections between health and academic achievement, and the importance of
evidence-based school policies and practices. The ten components include:
1. Family Engagement: Family engagement is critical to student success and wellbeing. For more information on family
engagement, review our "Elevating Family and Student Engagement" lessons!
2. Community Involvement: Communities and schools can work together to promote wellness for students. Community organizations,
such as volunteer groups, libraries, local businesses, and others, can partner with schools for initiatives
and activities that enhance the strength of the community and support student wellness.
3. Employee Wellness: The wellness of educators and other school staff is essential for creating a healthy environment. Educators
who are well can serve as role models for students, are more likely to find satisfaction with and stay in the
profession and enhance the quality of education that students receive. For more information on employee
wellness, review Part 1 of this lesson!
4. Counseling, Psychological, and Social Services: It is essential for schools to promote access to counseling, psychological, and social services in order for all students to thrive. Students and educators may need assessments, treatment, or interventions, and
providing access to these services helps promote wellbeing for all.
5. Health Services: Similar to counseling, psychological, and social services, providing access to health services is essential in
promoting wellbeing for all. Prevention and intervention for medical concerns, intervention in emergency
situations, and other services help improve wellbeing.
6. Physical Environment: The physical environment of the school can make a big difference in the sense of safety and comfort that
students and educators feel. A comfortable and safe environment enhances mental health and wellbeing.
7. Social and Emotional Climate: The climate of a school is essential in promoting and supporting wellbeing. Positive school cultures
promote wellness, increase feelings of connectedness in the community, and improve mental health. For
more information on creating positive school climates, review our "School Climate and Safety
Enhancement" lesson.
8. Health Education: Health education is essential to provide students to foster their independence and help them make
informed and healthy decisions. High-quality health education empowers students to build healthy habits
that last for a lifetime.
9. Nutrition Environment and Services: Nutrition is another component of overall health and wellbeing. Nutrition services in a school can include
providing healthy meals, providing education about nutrition, and building a positive culture that
promotes healthy nutrition choices.
10. Physical Education and Physical Activity: Physical education and physical activity are also huge contributors to student wellness. Providing access to physical education, recess, and sports teams can promote a lifelong love of physical activity that supports
health and wellness.

Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child
(WSCC)
The Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child, or WSCC model, is CDC's
framework for addressing health in schools. The WSCC model is student-
centered and emphasizes the role of the community in supporting the school,
the connections between health and academic achievement and the importance
of evidence-based school policies and practices.
READ MORE CDC 
In South Carolina, school districts can participate in the Medical University of South Carolina
Boeing Center for Children's Wellness (MUSC BCCW).
The MUSC BCCW School-Based Wellness Initiative works to create a culture of wellness by
providing direct support and motivation for K-12 schools and districts. The Initiative is
designed to engage the school community in creating a healthy learning environment;
supporting schools in the implementation of evidence-based policy, system, and
environmental strategies at the population level targeting improved nutrition, increased
physical activity, enhanced social and emotional wellness for both students and staff. 19
districts and 204 schools participated in this School-based Wellness Initiative during the 2021–
2022 school year!
Follow the link and download the PDF below to explore
the Boeing Center for Children's Wellness.
Our Initiatives
The MUSC Boeing Center for Children's Wellness works in partnership with
schools and school districts to build a culture of wellness.
READ MORE MUSCKIDS 
FINAL 2022 BCCW Impact Report.pdf
5.2 MB

Physical Health and Wellbeing
Strategies for Promoting Healthy Habits for Student Wellness
Physical health is critical to the wellness of students in the school building. Physical health can
be addressed through the components of WSCC involving nutrition, physical activity, health
services, and health education. In this section, we will review how to address these wellness
components and provide resources for school implementation.
“A healthy outside starts from the inside.”
- Robert Urich -
Nutrition
Cartoon image of students in school lunch cafeteria
In 1946, the National School Lunch Program (NSLP) was created by Congress in the National
School Lunch Act. In the Act, Congress declared the program a "measure of National Security to
safeguard the health and well-being of the Nation’s children."
Nutrition was and continues to be an important focus for schools because it is one of the
bedrocks of students' physical and mental wellness and academic engagement.
Getting healthy meals and snacks helps students show up ready to learn!
"Every student has the potential to do well in school.
Failing to provide good nutrition puts them at risk of
missing out on meeting that potential. However, taking
action today to provide healthier choices in schools can
help to set students up for a successful future full of
possibilities."-David Just, PhD, Cornell Center for Behavioral Economics in Child Nutrition Programs

Food Insecurity
Federal and state policies regarding nutrition standards for schools are in place. Food assistance
programs help reimburse school meals for children of low-income families, such as the School
Breakfast Program, Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP), National School Lunch
Program, and Summer Food Service Program. Providing nutritious meals and snacks can help
students retain the information they learned during the school day.
IMAGE HERE
Image of an arrow depicting the degrees of food insecurity; adult and child ﬁgures at
each degree.
But even with these programs in place, many students do not qualify for
food assistance programs, even though they live in households that have
trouble affording nutritious food.
Food insecurity is the limited or uncertain availability of nutritionally
adequate and safe foods, or the limited or uncertain ability to acquire
acceptable foods in socially acceptable ways. More than one quarter of
families with food insecurity are not eligible for federal aid, leaving
them with few options for healthy food.
Research by Tufts University School of Nutrition and numerous other studies over the past
decades show that hungry children do not learn effectively and that even mild malnutrition can
impair physical and cognitive growth.
In addition to negative cognitive effects, hunger often results in emotional and social
diffculties. It is quite simple: the negative effects of childhood food insecurity translate to more
frequent illnesses, behavior issues, and poor academics. Access to healthy nutritious meals
positively affects children’s health and learning. Once children reach school age, they spend
more of their waking hours in school than in any other environment. This makes schools
essential to helping students meet their nutritional needs.
"All children should have a healthy meal. If children eat, they
learn better.""-Katrina Shealy, South Carolina Senator

Nutrition Education
Along with providing healthy nutritious meals for all students, schools can make nutrition
education part of universal practices. Students can learn good eating habits in school just like
they learn other academic skills.
Scroll through the carousel below to review steps
schools can take to promote nutrition awareness and
healthier behaviors.
Nutrition Awareness
IMAGE HERE
Providing information about nutrition empowers children with the knowledge and
skills to make healthy food and beverage choices. Nutrition awareness is part of a
well-rounded health education curriculum but can also be included in other classes
and incorporated throughout the school. Schools can tailor nutrition programs for
their environment, daily schedules, and available resources.
Strategy 1:
In the classroom
Nutrition education can happen as a speciﬁcally focused course or lesson in the
classroom, but it can also be incorporated into everyday lessons. Some examples of
this include:
counting with pictures of fruits and vegetables
learning fractions by measuring ingredients for a recipe
examining how plants grow
learning about cultural food traditions
Strategy 2:
Farm-to-school
Farm-to-school programs vary in each school or district, but often include one or
more of the following strategies:
purchasing and serving local or regionally produced foods in the school meal
programs
educating students about agriculture, food, health, and nutrition
engaging students in hands-on learning opportunities through gardening,
cooking lessons, or farm ﬁeld trips
Students who participate in farm-to-school activities increase their knowledge about
nutrition and agriculture, are more willing to try new foods, and consume more fruits
and vegetables. Click here for information on South Carolina Farm-to-School
resources.
Strategy 3:
Plant a school garden
School gardens can provide with students hands-on experience and enhance their
education in many ways.
Students can prepare the soil for the garden, plant seeds, harvest fruits and
vegetables, and taste the food from the garden. Produce from school gardens can be
incorporated into school meals or taste tests. Classroom teachers can teach lessons in
math, science, history, and language arts using the school garden. Click here for a
school garden fact sheet.
Strategy 4
In the cafeteria
Cafeterias are where students eat, so it is important to utilize them to promote
healthy choices. Schools can offer healthy choices in the cafeteria, use signs and
decorations to promote nutrition education, and build a positive culture around
eating.
The Smart Snacks in Schoolnutrition standards support better health for our kids and
echo the good work already taking place in schools across the country.
Other Opportunities:
Nutrition education can also be incorporated outside of the cafeteria and mealtimes.
Positive messages about nutrition can be provided through:
morning announcements
school assemblies
materials sent home to parents and guardians
staff meetings
parent-teacher group meetings
These strategies can help reinforce messages about good nutrition and help ensure
that students see and hear consistent information about healthy eating across the
school campus and at home.

Physical Activity
Like good nutrition, physical activity can have a positive impact on academic performance.
Physical wellnessis a person's ability to learn and model healthy practices and routines. It is
being able to care for your body by consistently making healthy choices.
When a person is physically well, they exhibit:
attentiveness and alertness
positive interpersonal relationships
increased engagement
Review the image below for more information on the beneffts of physical activity.
IMAGE HERE
Infographic of statistics promoting the role of schools in physical activity
The American Pediatric Associate recommends that elementary and middle school students get
at least 60 minutes of physical activity most days, including vigorous activities (such as
swimming, running, or other high-intensity exercises) three days a week.
It is also very important for students to be educated about physical wellbeing not only to
maintain or improve their health but to create behaviors that will last into adulthood.
Physical Activity Challenges
The beneﬁts of physical activity are clear, but sometimes it can still be challenging to promote
or participate in physical activities. Unlike a few decades ago, children and adolescents today are
leading increasingly sedentary lifestyles. Time spent on computers, smart phones, tablets and
binge-watching television have often taken the place of physical exercise.
Health conditions, such as abnormal blood sugar and high cholesterol, were once rare in
children. But in a recent study, about two-thirds of American high school students already had
at least one of those conditions (National Institute of Health, 2022).
Also, lack of physical activity, especially in young people, has the potential to exacerbate existing
health disparities affecting socially vulnerable populations (Berkley Public Health, 2022). 
Regular physical activity can help improve cardiorespiratory ﬁtness, build strong bones and
muscles, control weight, reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression, and reduce the risk of
developing health conditions such as:
heart disease
cancer
type 2 diabetes
high blood pressure
osteoporosis
obesity 

Childhood obesity is a serious problem in the United States, putting children and
adolescents at risk for poor health. Obesity prevalence among children and adolescents is
too high. Children with obesity are more likely to suffer from anxiety, depression, and low
self-esteem.
The Centers for Disease and Control (CDC) (2021) reported that for children and
adolescents aged 2-19 years in 2017-2020:
The prevalence of obesity was 19.7% and affected about 14.7 million children and
adolescents
Obesity prevalence was 12.7% among 2- to 5-year-olds, 20.7% among 6- to 11-
year-olds, and 22.2% among 12- to 19-year-olds
Obesity-related conditions include high blood pressure, high cholesterol, type 2
diabetes, breathing problems such as asthma and sleep apnea, and joint problems
By increasing students’ physical activity and physical
education, schools can help reduce the prevalence of
these conditions and signiffcantly improve academic
achievement and classroom behavior.Review the PDF
below for tips for promoting physical health.
Tips for Teachers.pdf
3.5 MB
Additional Resources
Brain Breaks
Taking "brain breaks" and being physically active in the classroom can help reset our minds
and bodies when we’re feeling unfocused and allow us to get back to work. Try allowing
students to take a moment to do some jumping jacks, go for a quick walk, or stand and do
breathing exercises. Giving individuals or groups of students an opportunity to take a brain
break during the school day can replenish attention, motivation, and energy levels needed to
keep learning. 5 minutes is all it takes!
Check out the video below for an example Brain Break!
Brain Breaks - Action Songs for Children - Move and Freeze - Kids ……
Brain Breaks - Action Songs for Children - Move and Freeze - Kids 
Coordinated Approach to Child Health (CATCH)
The Coordinated Approach to Child Health,CATCH, promotes physical activity and healthy food
choices for children from preschool through eighth grade.
The program also includes the CATCH Coordination Kit which provides a step-by-step guide for
increasing collaboration between school administrators, teachers, nutrition staff, parents, and
community constituents to deliver coordinated health messages across children's learning
environments and afterschool settings.

The Alliance for a Healthier Generation
The Alliance for a Healthier Generation works with schools, youth-serving organizations,
businesses, and communities to support kids in developing lifelong healthy habits by ensuring
the environments that surround them provide and promote good health. The organization
developed the Healthy Schools Programwhich provides no-cost wellness supports for school
districts across the country. Watch this short video from the Alliance that perfectly sums up the
big picture of why nutrition and physical health are so important to overall wellness.


Mental Health and Wellness
Improving Wellness for Social and Emotional Health
We can all agree that nutrition and physical health are vital wellness factors in a student’s ability
to learn. Healthy children learn better (Basch, 2010). 
Another critical component of wellness is a child’s mental health–social, emotional, and
behavioral wellbeing is vital for their ability to engage, self-regulate, problem solve, and learn.
We recognize that mental health is equally as important as nutrition and physical health, and
that these inﬂuence each other. Unfortunately, when a student seems sad or irritable, not
interested in the activities they used to enjoy, many adults may tend to think of it as a typical
phase—that the student will “get over it” eventually. Although most children and adolescents
do experience bad days from time to time, sometimes there could be more to the story.
If you took the “All Hands on Deck” course, you learned that mental health can affect physical
health and behavior and untreated mental health challenges interfere with learning,
socialization, and self-esteem. This can lead to other problems with lifelong repercussions. For
some children, untreated mental health problems can lead to harming others or self-harm.
The current climate suggests the immediate need to enhance (expedite) and prioritize students'
positive mental health and wellness with more effective universal practices and intervention
strategies for all students embedded into the learning culture. We must treat wellness as a
school subject that is just as important as reading and math!

Youth Mental Health Challenges
In the fall of 2021, the American Academy of Pediatrics along with the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and the Children’s Hospital Association declared a national
emergency in child and adolescent mental health. This worsening mental health crisis is
undeniably tied to stress brought on by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, with
the ongoing, seemingly daily, prevalence of social violence and struggles for justice, equity, and
inclusion—trends were observed to be accelerating prior to 2020. Not surprisingly, children and
adolescents are stressed out!
"The ﬁrst step in solving a problem is to recognize that it does exist.""- Zig Ziglar

Student Stressors
Aligning support with student needs within the tiered approach of the MTSS framework
promotes personalization, targeted intervention, effcient resource allocation, preventive and
early intervention, student engagement, and a positive school climate. By understanding and
responding to the unique needs of students, educators can provide the right support at the right
time, maximizing student success and well-being. Let's review some of the common stressors
that students might have on their minds.
- School demands: school itself is a stressor for 83% of teens (APA, 2017). This
involves school exams, preparing to apply to college, pressure to succeed, and
more.
- Negative self-image: students may struggle with their body image, especially as
they are in late childhood and early adolescence, a major transitional period
accompanied by body-related changes. These concerns can increase the risk of
developing mental health concerns, like depression, anxiety, and eating disorders
- Social issues: Making and maintaining friendships can also be challenging.
Bullying, peer pressure, and negative relationships can damage students' self-
esteem and lead to isolation.
- Environmental Stressors: students experience stressors in their home
environments as well. Students may experience stressors from family ﬁnances,
changes (like moving, divorce, or starting a new school), living with chronically ill
or mentally ill family members, diffculties with siblings or other family members,
grief from the loss of people close to them, and many other situations.
The typical challenges that students face in high school continue as they always have, but it is
evident that stressors have grown more complicated. While some students can handle high-
pressure school environments, others report feeling chronically stressed, overworked, and
sleep deprived. 

Types of Stress
As you can see from the section above, there are diverse stressors that students may experience.
Stress can be further categorized into three different categories: positive stress, tolerable stress,
and toxic stress.
- Positive stress: While "stress" sounds scary, a low level of stress is normal - this is
called positive stress. Positive stress results in temporary activation of the body's
stress response system, causing increases in heart rate and stress hormones. For
example, a student might be nervous before their ﬁrst day of school and experience
"butterﬂies" in their stomach before they go into the classroom.
- Tolerable stress: This is the next level of stress. Tolerable stress results from
stressful, impactful events, such as the death of a loved one, natural disasters, or
injuries. This level of stress may activate the stress response system for a short
period of time, but the body goes back to "normal" and recovers, especially with the
support of relationships and other healthy coping mechanisms.
- Toxic stress: This type of stress involves intense, prolonged activation of the stress
response system and can lead to long-lasting "wear-and-tear" on the body and
brain.Toxic stress experienced in childhood (ages 0–17 years) is referred to as
adverse childhood experiences or ACEs. These experiences are very common: nearly
two-thirds of adults report having experienced at least one ACE during childhood
(CDC, 2023).ACEs have been linked to chronic health problems, mental illness, and
substance abuse as children grow to become adults. ACEs can also negatively impact
education and job opportunities, but, fortunately, with the right support and
positive relationships, students can recover from ACEs.
To review common ACEs, view the chart below. Click to
enlarge.
IMAGE HERE
Infographic of types of adverse childhood experiences (CDC, 2015)

Mental Health Concerns
Many of our teens continue to experience a decline in mental health
—rising anxiety, depression, withdrawal, aggression, resulting in
poor coping skills such as drug and/or alcohol use and suicidal
ideation.
According to a 2019 Pew Research Poll, 70% of teens surveyed agree
that anxiety and depression are major problems among peers. Click
to enlarge the image for more of the poll details.
IMAGE HERE
Graph indicating % of teens reporting major problems. Categories include anxiety &
depression, bullying, drug addiction, drinking alcohol, and poverty.
Some teens experiencing high levels of stress and anxiety are simply without the
necessary support and resources to cope. Emergency room visits for self-infficted,
nonfatal injuries among children and young adults increased by 5.7% from 2008 to
2015. The CDC found that between 2007 and 2017, more teens were seriously
considering suicide or hurting themselves in suicide attempts than in past decades.
To learn about suicide preventionclick here.
Teens report that they don't speak up about their mental health because they feel like adults will
just take over the conversation. Teens often won't tune into suggestions or advice because they
feel they are just being told what to do, rather than being trusted and treated as capable. And
they often don't feel their frustrations are being treated as valid — not feeling heard, seen, or
understood. Many teens report often feeling like their mental health is not taken seriously by
adults at home or at school. 
Scroll through the carousel below to read some
comments made by teenagers.
“I feel like the warning signs I gave off when I was younger, to me it felt like it
was so noticeable. I was always angry. I felt like every single day was a bad day. I
felt like nobody wanted to help me. There’s something wrong. How could you
not see it?”
- Katie, a teenager speaking about her mental health and not being seen
“Mental health is not taken seriously at all. At my school, we only have one
counselor for 8-12th grade students. That is crazy because we have 800-900
students and for all those students there is only one counselor. Schools don’t
take time to talk to students about mental health and how to take care of it.”
- unknown high school student
“I was always afraid that they[adults] were going to say it’s stupid or it’s dumb
that you feel that way, about being depressed, [like] ‘That’s not a reason to get
depressed’ and I didn’t want them to say stuff about things I felt because I
didn’t want to feel stupid.”
- 15 year old in a focus group
“A lot of the time it feels like no one is really listening to me. It feels like they
listen to my parents, but they’re not paying attention to me … That’s why I don’t
want to help.”
- 15 year old (previously treated for mental illness)
The above quotes are just a few examples of the ongoing communication problems that teens
perceive and that inﬂuence how and if they will seek help for themselves or help for others.
Mental Illness in Early Childhood
While teens have high rates of mental health concerns, and many mental health concerns
increase in adolescence, students also face mental health challenges at an earlier age, often at
the elementary school level (e.g., McClure, 2009).
According to a study done by the Department of Psychiatry at Harvard University in 2019,
around 10% of children ages 2 to 5 showed signs of an anxiety disorder. 17.4% or 1 in 6 U.S.
children aged 2–8 years had a diagnosed mental, behavioral, or developmental disorder.
In fact, anxiety is one the most prevalent childhood mental health problems (Krain et al., 2007).
Anxiety may present in young children as fear or worry but can also make children irritable and
angry (CDC, 2022). This can create behavioral issues in school and in the classroom. Be aware,
however, that some anxious children keep their worries to themselves, and their symptoms can
be missed.
Elementary school students can be stressed about some of the same issues as middle and high
schoolers, such as struggles with academics, not having enough friends, being bullied, and
exposure to major societal issues that they are not developmentally able to understand. They
may express their stress a little differently with behaviors such as more outbursts, crying,
complaining more than usual about aches and pains, displaying surprising fearful reactions, or
excessive clinging to a parent or teacher.
…young people are faced with all kinds of challenges
on a daily basis. They may be homeless. They’re
dealing with issues of domestic violence, and
community violence. Some of them may not have
food to eat on a regular basis...they don’t leave those
issues at the door, they take those issues into the
school building and ultimately into the classroom.”
— Terri D. Wright, PhD, MPH, Founder, Center for School, Health and Education 

Strategies for Supporting Youth Mental Health
Improving Emotional Wellness at the Tier 1 Level
Knowing all the challenges to mental health and wellbeing that students experience, it is
important to have a plan in place for how to support them. Utilizing the MTSS framework and
Tier 1 support can help organize these supports.
From the ﬁrst lesson in this Tier 1 series, "Universal Supports," you know that Tier 1 is the
largest tier and the foundation for the MTSS framework. Tier 1 encompasses the entire school
community with core instruction that integrates wellness activities for all students, families,
educators, and staff to participate.
Your district may have already begun utilizing an MTSS that focuses on the academic and
behavioral needs of students. Many school districts have. Even though academic success and
student behavior are both inﬂuenced by the state of a student's mental health and wellness,
integrating mental health support continues to be a challenge for some school districts. To
prioritize and enhance student wellness, mental health practices, and interventions must be
built into the MTSS.
No matter whether your district has a current MTSS or is still in the installation process, it can
seem diffcult or overwhelming to be charged with the task of integrating mental health
practices. But it is not as hard as you think. In fact, you are already doing the work. Most
educators are already doing so many things that are considered universal (Tier 1) mental health
practices. Here is Brandi Simonsen again, discussing ways that educators may already be
implementing Tier 1 practices in the classroom.
Your district may have already begun utilizing an MTSS that focuses on the academic and
behavioral needs of students. Many school districts have. However, integrating mental health
support continues to be a challenge for some school districts, even though it is clear that
academic success and student behavior are both inﬂuenced by the state of a student's mental
health and wellness. To prioritize and enhance student wellness, mental health practices, and
interventions must be built into the MTSS.
In the following sections, we will review strategies for improving wellness, including:
Trauma-sensitive practices
Universal screening
Mental health literacy
Positive educator-student relationships

- Trauma-sensitive Practices: A trauma-sensitive school describes a school in which all students feel safe, welcomed, and
supported and where addressing trauma's impact on learning is schoolwide and at the center of
its educational mission.
“Every year, there are a few students in my 6th grade class I just can’t reach no
matter what I try...
After learning about trauma’s impact at school, their behaviors began to make
sense to me.
Now I focus on making routines predictable and try to be more conscious of the
tone of voice I use with all my students.
But I’m only one teacher in my students’ day. I know that for students to truly
feel safe, trauma sensitive approaches must be infused throughout the entire
building. How do I get this started at my school?
I can see that it will take all of us.”
- Educator, NEA.com
Trauma-Sensitive Practices
Learning about the impacts of trauma can help keep educators from misunderstanding the
reasons underlying some children’s diffculties with learning, behavior, and relationships.
Once schools understand the educational impacts of trauma, trauma sensitivity can become
a regular part of how the school is run. School becomes a safe supportive environment where
students feel connected and conﬁdent to learn and succeed. Trauma sensitivity will look
different at each school. However, a shared deﬁnition of what it means to be a trauma-
sensitive school can bring educators, parents, and policymakers together around a common
vision.
Implementing trauma-informed practices in an MTSS supports students with adverse
childhood experiences and those who are experiencing mental health issues—social,
emotional, and behavioral problems. In a tiered system, support can be implemented at all
levels.
The training,Understanding Adverse Childhood Experiences from ACE Interface, Inc. is
nationally recognized as a powerful curriculum that helps individuals understand and
recognize adverse childhood experiences.
Resources for Creating a Trauma Sensitive School
The Trauma and Learning Policy Initiative (TLPI) was created in partnership between
Massachusetts Advocates for Children and Harvard Law School with the mission to ensure that
all students, including those impacted by trauma, succeed at their highest levels in school and
in life.
Helping Traumatized Children Learn, published in 2005, is TLPI’s landmark report and
summarizes research from psychology and neurobiology that documents the impact that
trauma from exposure to violence can have on children’s learning, behavior, and relationships
in school.
Volume 2 of Helping Traumatized Children Learn: Creating and Advocating for Trauma-
Sensitive Schools (2013) offers a process for creating trauma-sensitive schools and a policy
agenda to provide the support schools need to achieve this goal. The Guide is intended to be a
living document that will grow and change as more schools become trauma sensitive and add to
their ideas.
Download both documents using the link below.
TLPI Publications - Helping Traumatized Children Learn
Helping Traumatized Children Learn volumes 1 & 2 can help any school create a
safe and secure trauma sensitive learning environment to beneﬁt all children.
Also, the National Center on Safe Supportive Learning Environments developed the Building
Trauma-Sensitive Schools Training Package to introduce all school staff to the concept of
trauma sensitivity and provide examples of trauma-sensitive practices that can be adopted in
the classroom and schoolwide. Resources include an online module, downloadable handouts,
and a facilitation guide that includes suggestions for how to conduct in-person training
sessions using the module and handouts. The National Center on Safe Supportive Learning
Environments website content was assembled under contracts from the U.S. Department of
Education, Offce of Safe and Supportive Schools to the American Institutes for Research (AIR).
Universal Screening
Another way to support wellness at the Tier 1 level of MTSS is through universal screening. Let's
review the importance of universal systematic social, emotional, and behavioral (SEB)
screening, which was discussed in detail in the previous SBHA Core MTSS Practices course,
"Screening for Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Functioning."
Promoting social and emotional development for all students in classrooms involves identifying
those students struggling with mental health challenges that impact their full access to and
participation in learning. Some of the beneﬁts of universal SEB screening include:
- Universal SEB screening is accessible to all students in the classroom.
- School-based universal SEB health screening provides important information
about the emotional and behavioral health of students.
- Universal SEB screening is the ﬁrst step in helping to identify
students in need of additional supports.
- Universal SEB screening is associated with early identiﬁcation and treatment of
mental health and behavioral concerns.
- Data from universal SEB screeners gives districts and schools the ability to monitor
school trends and develop targeted social, emotional and behavioral health
strategies speciﬁc to the needs in each individual school building.
- Universal screening is recognized as an essential component of a multi-tiered
school behavioral health framework.
SEB screening data are valid indicators of student SEB competence and risk. Having this
information helps districts pinpoint areas of need and maximize opportunities for early
intervention and prevention before poor outcomes begin to transpire. Districts can aggregate
data and make informed decisions about prioritizing, setting goals, gathering relevant
resources, and taking action.

Mental Health Literacy
Another way to support universal wellness for students is to provide mental health literacy
programming. Lack of knowledge regarding mental health and the stigma associated with
mental illness are major barriers to the promotion of mental health and early intervention.
Addressing a youth mental health crisis requires understanding what mental health is: this is
where mental health literacy can be helpful. 
Evidence-based mental health literacyis a scientiﬁcally established effective foundation for all
mental health improvements. With good mental health literacy, we are empowered and provided
with the knowledge that we need to help us build better lives, better systems of care, and a better
society (Wei & Kutcher 2018).
School-wide mental health literacy has four unique, yet integrated components:
- Understanding mental health and how to maintain good mental health
- Understanding mental disorders and their treatments
- Decreasing stigma
- Increasing health-seeking effcacy
Schoolwide programs and presentations and the regular distribution of materials to increase
mental health literacy and reduce the stigma of mental illness are Tier 1 strategies. Topics can
include many subjects, such as suicide prevention, the effects of trauma and adverse childhood
experiences (ACES), recognizing the signs of depression, anxiety, and ADHD, and improving
family relationships and self-regulation skills. Also, educators can help guide students toward
language free of mental health stigma by helping them identify and replace stigmatizing
language in the classroom.

Mental Health and High School Curriculum Guide
The Mental Health and High School Curriculum Guide is one resource that has been developed
to help enhance the mental health literacy of students and is targeted to be used in 9th and 10th
grade (ages 13 to 15 years). This is the time of the lifespan in which the diagnoses of mental
disorders begin to increase dramatically; it is thus essential that young people be able to have
the knowledge, attitudes, and competencies to help themselves and others if necessary.
Download the resource below for a curriculum guide to increasing mental health awareness.

Mental Health Literacy Website
Another resource online is mentalhealthliteracy.org. The faculties of education from St. Francis
Xavier University, Western University, and the University of British Columbia, partnered with
this project to build a comprehensive mental health literacy resource for educators. Follow the
link below to access these resources.
Mental Health Literacy
"With good mental health literacy, we learn how to take better care of
ourselves, our loved ones and our communities. We are empowered and
provided with the skills that we need to help us build better lives, better
systems of care and a better society."

Classroom WISE
Classroom WISE is a three-part training package that includes a free self-paced online course, a
comprehensive video library, and a website for K–12 educators on mental health literacy.
Developed by the Mental Health Technology Transfer Center (MHTTC) Network in partnership
with the National Center for School Mental Health, this package offers evidence-based
strategies and skills to engage and support students experiencing adversity and distress. Click
the link below to explore this resource.
Well-Being Information and Strategies for Educators Classroom WISE is a FREE
3-part training package that assists K-12 educators and school staff in
supporting the mental health of students in the classroom. Developed by the
Mental Health Technology Transfer Center (MHTTC) Network in partnership
with the National Center for School Mental Health, this package offers
evidence-based strategies and skills to engage and support students
experiencing adversity and distress.
RethinkEd
RethinkEd is a technical platform that promotes greater understanding of mental health.
Schools can partner with Rethink to help with wellness needs. See examples of the wellness
supports offered below:
Social and Emotional Skills –
Rethink Ed offers resources for students, families, staff, and educators related to behavioral
health.
There are resources for educators to help students develop important skills like stress
management, resilience, and empathy while learning to build a safe and affrming culture within
the school community.
Supports Mental Wellness –
By providing supports for the mental wellness of students, families, staff, and educators,
Rethinks Mental Wellness Solution promotes a greater understanding of mental health and
wellbeing while supplying strategies that support the success of the entire school community.
Promotes Educator & Staff Resilience, Wellbeing, & Performance –
Resources to help educators and staff put their well-being ﬁrst so that they can focus better, feel
less stress, and create happy learning environments for the students.
Rethink Ed can also support schools with the process of
MTSS implementation. It also provides support and
other resources for special education and professional
development. For more information, follow the link
below
RETHINKED
Innovative Solutions for Healthier Schools | RethinkEd
Combining technology and research to deliver industry leading solutions in SEL,
mental health, professional development, and special education.


National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI)
The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) has created Ending the Silence, a free,
evidence-based, 50-minute session designed for middle and high school students. This
engaging presentation helps students learn about the warning signs of mental health
conditions, facts and statistics about mental illness, and the steps to take if they or a loved one
are showing symptoms of a mental health condition.
This program is offered at no cost to schools and communities and is presented in person, but it
is also now available online when an in-person presentation is not available.
NAMI Ending the Silence presentations include two leaders: one who shares an informative
presentation and a young adult with a mental health condition who shares their journey of
recovery. Audience members can ask questions and gain understanding of an often-
misunderstood topic. Through dialogue, we can help grow the movement to end stigma.
NAMI also offers programming for staff and families:
NAMI Ending the Silence for School Staff (in person only): 1-hour presentation for school staff
members that includes information about warning signs, facts, statistics, how to approach
students, and how to work with families.
NAMI Ending the Silence for Families(in-person only): 1-hour presentation for adults with
middle- or high-school-aged youth that includes warning signs, facts, statistics, how to talk
with your child, and how to work with school staff.
Schedule an Ending the Silence Presentation
If you would like to host an in person or virtual NAMI Ending the Silence presentation at your school or
youth group, click the button for more information.

Building Positive Educator-Student Relationships
One more way to promote universal wellness for students is to promote positive relationships.
Educators strive to engage students, promote the highest standards of academics, attend to the
needs of each learner, support each and every success, and genuinely care about the wellbeing
of each student.
Whether you are new to the school district or have been around for 20+ years, you know that
positive student-adult interactions encourage students' motivation and engagement in
learning. Watch this video from Edutopia giving a quick overview of the "power of relationships
in schools" and why this is one of the most important aspects of teaching.
The Power of Relationships in Schools
The Power of Relationships in Schools
Intentionally building positive student-educator relationships promotes trust and respect,
reduces stress, and serves as one of the most important overall drivers of student, educator, and
whole-school wellness. Scroll through the carousel to gain information about practices that can
be used to develop relationships and build positive school and classroom community.
Effective Relationship-Building Practices
Relationship-building practices are proven to be effective in supporting student
well-being in schools and classrooms. Here we highlight four examples:community
circles, relationship mapping, audit & reﬂect, and engagement & connectedness.
Example 1
Community Circles
A classroom practice that emphasizes predictable, structured open dialogues between
students and adults.
Community Circles allow educators to see each student as an individual. Each student
brings a unique story and perspective each day, enriching and enlivening the class
with their viewpoints.
One easy way to enhance the relationship between students and adults is to let them
know when you don’t see them there. For example, one high school English teacher
shared that she records a quick message with her students at the beginning of class
and sends it to those who are absent to let them know they were missed. 
Community Circles can be used with all grade levels.
Example 2
Trust and Safety through Relationship Mapping
When a student is more familiar with you, they feel comfortable and safe.
The relationship and trust that is built provides an opportunity to learn about the
student and techniques that may work best to help them.
Build relationships intentionally.
Relationship Mappingis an activity that connects one adult to every student in
school. Having a trusting and deep connection with students increases a sense of
belonging in the school community, reduces bullying, lowers drop-out rates, and
improves social and emotional capacities. This tool allows staff to inventory their
relationships and create an action plan to ensure all students feel a sense of
belonging.
Example 3
Audit & Reffect
You read all about school and classroom expectations in the previous lesson, but did
you include setting and meeting expectations for yourself? Take a moment to notice
the way that you interact with your students. If possible, watch a video of your own
teaching. 
Equity Audit and Reﬂection is a list of questions that allow teachers to reﬂect on
whether they use culturally responsive teaching in their classroom to ensure equity.
Some example questions include:
Are you giving students meaningful feedback that says you care about them and
their learning or are you constantly telling your students to hurry?
In your conversations, are you focusing on what your students have accomplished
or are you concentrating your comments on what they have not yet mastered?
Does your body language, facial expression, and tone of voice show your students
that you are interested in them as people too?
Are you telling them to do one thing, yet you model quite different behavior? For
example, are you telling your students to listen to each other, but then look bored
when one of them talks to the class?
Are you paying more attention to some students than to others?
Example 4
Engagement & Connectedness
How do educators create opportunities for full engagement for students in safe
learning environments? By ﬁnding ways to connect content and curriculum to the
everyday lives of students.
Promoting connectedness among all school community members is key to fostering
an open and positive dialogue and participation in various well-being activities:
celebrate resilience and acknowledge that fear and worry are normal human
reactions and each individual student, teacher or parent experiences them to
different degrees. 
set up networks where students and adults positively interact.
support members of the school community to express their feelings and
concerns;
dedicate time and space for this in your daily routine
Check out this resource for more info on school connectedness:
Summary
Improving students' relationships with teachers has important, positive and long-
lasting implications for both students' academic and social development.
Positive teacher-student relationships—evidenced by teachers' reports of low
conﬂict, a high degree of closeness and support, and little dependency—have been
shown to support students' adjustment to school, contribute to their social skills,
promote academic performance and foster students' resiliency in academic
performance (e.g., Battistich, Schaps, & Wilson, 2004). 
Additional Resources

Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
- A universal approach to wellness in schools means that everyone will have access to
positive health and wellbeing supports. These supports are appropriate for each
grade level and should be rigorously implemented to build and strengthen skills
that are part of the foundation for good mental health and resilience.
- All parts of the school, from the front door to the playground, offer opportunities to
practice and reinforce wellness. Wellness does not spontaneously grow in the
sidewalk cracks of time between class assignments and faculty meetings.
- Simply put, those who feel better can learn better.
Before you go!




#####
Tier 2
*****
Welcome to the comprehensive course on implementing Tier 2 school mental and behavioral health
interventions. In the following lessons, we will equip you with the knowledge and strategies needed to plan and
implement supportive and e ective Tier 2 practices within your school community. As you know, the primary
goal of Tier 2 interventions is to provide targeted support to students who are at risk of experiencing mental
and behavioral health challenges. By implementing Tier 2, educators identify and assist students who may be
struggling before these issues escalate into more severe problems. It is the bridge between those students who
may not be as responsive to Tier 1 interventions, but do not require the intensive services typically associated
with Tier 3 supports. Each lesson will guide you through essential concepts and practical steps to enhance the
well-being of your students and create a positive learning environment. Let's begin!
Installing and Launching Tier 2
MTSS Teams Making Data-informed Decisions
Mentoring-Based Programs
Self-Care and Coping for Educators
Classroom Programs for Mental Health and Emotional Literacy
@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 5
Installing and Launching Tier 2


Outcomes:
1. Evaluate the role of Tier 2 in the Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS)
2. Recognize the pre-installation steps needed before Tier 2 is launched
3. Conceptualize a plan for installing Tier 2 in your schools
4. Communicate steps necessary to launch Tier 2
5. Review progress monitoring and evaluation tools speciﬁc to Tier 2


The Middle Ground


Bridging Supports Between Tier 1 and Tier 3
Think about your students for a moment. 
Happy students
You can remember a student that you knew was thriving—the one with steady and healthy friendships, who was growing towards
their learning goals and stepping closer towards fulﬁlling the proﬁle of a South Carolina graduate.
For students who are thriving, Tier 1 supports are likely su cient for their growth. With a strong Tier 1 foundation, many of your
students (~80%) will be ﬂourishing academically, behaviorally, and socially.
Reﬂect on your educational experience again. You can most likely remember a student who was struggling intensely—the one who
either never spoke up or was always disrupting his or her environment, who was close to dropping out, and was mentally
elsewhere while at school.
Three students bullying another one 
For the up to 20% of students who are acutely struggling, Tier 3 provides the intense, individualized care they need to gain positive
student outcomes. 


Students in the Middle 
A student with head on desk
What about students with struggles not quite as apparent as students with Tier 3 supports? 
These are students who aren't exhibiting extreme internalizing or externalizing behaviors, and are not on the brink of dropping
out, but show warning signs that Tier 1 support isn't meeting their needs.
That's where Tier 2 comes in, and it is the focus of our lesson!
MTSS pyramid
As you think of the Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS), what lies in the middle of the MTSS triangle may feel like it's the
hardest to deﬁne. This is supported by MTSS consultants who ﬁnd that schools understand and implement Tier 1 and Tier 3 but
struggle to distinguish and bolster their Tier 2 supports (Shurley, 2022). 
If this sounds familiar to you or is something you’re worried about, you don’t need to panic! Throughout this course, you’ll learn
the role of Tier 2 in MTSS, analyze the key elements of Tier 2, and evaluate the practical steps involved in Tier 2 implementation.
Let’s start by exploring Tier 2’s role and function within MTSS. While Tier 2 may seem like a bridge covering an overwhelming
distance, we, the SBHA, are here to guide you along the journey! 
If you recognize this situation or have concerns about it, there's no need to worry! This lesson will help you understand the role of
Tier 2 in MTSS, analyze key components, and assess the steps for implementation.  While Tier 2 may seem like a bridge covering an
overwhelming distance, we, the SBHA team, are here to guide you! Let's begin by exploring the function of Tier 2 supports within
an MTSS framework. 


What is Tier 2?  
Tier 2 is based on group problem-solving around common areas of need within the school (IEP Technical Center, 2023). The key
words for Tier 2 are instruction and intervention. 

Instruction
Tier 2 is an extension of Tier 1’s instruction for academics, behavior, and positive health and wellbeing. Students receiving Tier 2
supports are given more instruction and time to learn and practice the skills that they are struggling with. In many ways, you are
sca olding your work with Tier 1 with what you're already doing in the classroom. Dr. Lucille Eber, an experienced MTSS and PBIS
practitioner, sums up this aspect of Tier 2 supports beautifully with reading as an example: 
Positive health and wellbeing refers to a person’s physical, emotional, mental, and social wellbeing. You may be familiar
with the term “social-emotional learning”, and may even see materials in this course that reference SEL. Don’t worry—the
material still applies even with the different terms! 
“A Tier 2 support should merely be seen as an extension of what’s done every day in the
classroom, just like reading. You teach everybody reading, and some kids get more practice—
they don’t get something completely di erent. They get a little bit more, and a little bit more
individualized and more practice at it.”
- Dr. Lucille Eber, MTSS and PBIS Practitioner
As Dr. Eber said, Tier 2 is an extension of what you're already doing. It is not separate from Tier 1 activities or the relationships
you've already built with your students. It's simply more. While this is hard to capture in words, the rest of this lesson will clarify
how Tier 2 is an extension of what you're already doing. 

Intervention
One of the ways Tier 2 supports accomplish additional instruction is through targeted interventions, programs, and groups.
Targeted interventions with students receiving Tier 2 support typically occur in a small group format but may be done in a
classroom or in a one-on-one setting. Tier 2 interventions cover topics such as social skills, self-management, academic support,
and behavioral groups (Taveena, 2021). These are run by school faculty and sta  members who have been trained in the
appropriate intervention! You'll learn more about speciﬁc Tier 2 interventions later on in upcoming lessons! 








Tier 2 is not isolated from schoolwide systems, including the other MTSS tiers. Tier 2 is an extension of Tier 1 supports at a more intense,
targeted level.

Ideally, a student identified as needing Tier 2 supports is in an intervention within 72 hours. Realistically, students are placed in interventions
that are always running instead of "once a year" or semi-annually.

There is a “menu” of Tier 2 interventions that are easy to identify  implement and are known by all educators and staff.  

Let's be clear—Tier 2 is not reinventing the wheel or creating an individualized plan for each student. You take pre-established interventions
that are readily accessible and continuously available and implement them quickly and efficiently.

Tier 2 interventions are evidence-based with proven effectiveness and relevance to your students’ needs. Interventions are not randomly
created or haphazardly assigned to students.  

Students who need Tier 2 services are identified through multiple streams of data, such as teacher, parent, or self-nominations, universal
screeners, assessments, office discipline referrals, and more.

Using multiple streams of data and assessments, the intervention is assessed for its effectiveness and its implementation.
Tier 2 MTSS interventions are like constructing bridges in education. Like bridges connect distinct areas, Tier 2 bridges the space
between universal strategies (Tier 1) and intensive interventions (Tier 3). Imagine diverse student terrain; Tier 1 is the foundation.
However, some students may require additional support to cross over challenges that lie ahead. This is where Tier 2 interventions
step in as the bridge over obstacles that may be impeding their progress. Interventions are tailored to the speciﬁc needs of each
student. Just like bridges adapt to landscapes, interventions vary—small groups, personalized plans. Tier 2 o ers stability, aiding
students in navigating challenges. Supports at this tier are intended to be temporary, fostering growth, and guiding students
toward Tier 1 success with newfound skills.


The Process of Tier 2 Supports
Tier 2 is for students who are not thriving with Tier 1 supports but are also not exhibiting behavior or outcomes more appropriate
for Tier 3’s intensive, individualized care. Students receiving Tier 2 supports are in the in-between: they are at risk of presenting
more severe externalizing or internalizing behaviors, indicators of poor health and wellbeing, or academic struggles. 
A typical school base rate for Tier 2 is 10-15% of your students. Just because certain students need more support than Tier 1 o ers
does not mean that these students lose access to Tier 1 supports while they receive Tier 2 services. That is, students will always
need and have access to the support o ered by Tier 1!  
Students don’t have to move through the tiers sequentially. If a student comes in immediately needing Tier 2 support, you don’t
wait for them to adjust to Tier 1 ﬁrst. Within MTSS, students will move throughout the tiers ﬂuidly as needed. This means students
will move in and out of Tier 2 supports as their needs change! You can always walk forward, backwards, or pause on a bridge. It’s
the same with Tier 2!
Let's have a quick look at the overarching Tier 2 process! Don’t worry, the rest of this lesson will go into more detail. 


Introduction
Tier 2 Overview

Identi cation
Component 1
Students' need for Tier 2 supports are identiﬁed through data-based assessments, screeners, and nominations. 

Timeline
Component 2
Ideally, once a student is identiﬁed, they are in an intervention within 72-hours. However, this is not always possible.
When that timeframe is not realistic, the focus is on accommodating the student’s needs and school resources while
aiming for that 72-hour goal. 

Intervention
Component 3
Interventions are evidence and research-based, applied by a trained instructor and educator to small groups,
individual students in mentoring programs, or in the classroom structure. 

Fading Out
Component 4
Tier 2 is not a destination. Progress data and implementation is monitored to decide if the intervention should be
maintained, changed, or ceased as the student moves back to solely Tier 1 supports or up to Tier 3 treatment.
As we all know, most of life does not move linearly. This overview of the Tier 2 process is just that—a 3,000-foot
view above look at Tier 2. The actual "nitty gritty" of Tier 2 can be much more ﬂuid and changing.

Summary
Now that you have a base deﬁnition of Tier 2, let’s compare it to Tier 1 and Tier 3 to get a better picture of Tier 2’s unique function! 


The Di erence Between Tiers
As you compare the tiers to examine their di erences, you may remember the term layering, if you have taken our Core MTSS
course. Layering is applying several interventions at the same time. That is Tier 2 and Tier 3 occur along with the tiers that come
before them. That means that Tier 2 interventions are occurring with Tier 1, and Tier 3 interventions occur with Tier 1 and Tier 2
supports. These tiers operate as a team, not as separate targets!
Chart comparing the di erent tiers
One of the more evident di erences between the tiers is the number of students supported by each tier. Tier 1 is for all students;
Tier 2 is for groups of students; Tier 3 is for individual students. Tier 2 is the in-between of “all students at all times” and “one
student at unique times.” 
A spectrum of tiers
By "groups of students," we don’t mean that every Tier 2 program or intervention takes place in a small group. We mean that Tier 2
programs or interventions are for a group of students that may be in small group intervention (e.g., group grief counseling), a one-
on-one intervention (e.g., Check In, Check Out [CICO]), or even classroom wide. Therefore, the “group” could be the small group,
or the overall group of each student in CICO, for example.   
With this understanding of Tier 2’s distinction from the other tiers and its function, let’s look practically at how we install and
launch Tier 2 within our schools. You are going to review the following steps:  
Pre-Installation Steps
Installation Steps
Launching Tier 2
Monitoring and Evaluating Tier 2
Tier 1
For all students at all times
Schoolwide expectations are
established
Tier 2
For students at risk of
escalating
Interventions/instruction
may occur in a group, class
wide, or mentoring format
Tier 3
Wraparound services
Individualized treatment for a
student
	


Pre-Installation Steps


Before You Cross the Bridge: Preparing for Installation and Student Identiﬁcation
Planning and preparation are the keystones of success. As you delve into the realm of Tier 2 pre-installation, you may ﬁnd yourself
at a critical juncture where the foundation for a sturdy and reliable bridge is laid. Much like architects and engineers who map out
every detail before construction begins, understanding and mastering Tier 2 pre-installation is a vital step towards ensuring the
structural integrity and longevity of the bridge projects. You will now explore the essential concepts and techniques that underpin
the art of pre-installing Tier 2.  


Finding Essential Bridge Construction Tools: Finding the Right Equipment 
Planning for Tier 2 installation can feel overwhelming. It may be hard to know where to begin, especially since it’s building on Tier
1 foundations. Asking these questions from the Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS)'s Tier 2 Readiness Guide
(n.d.)  may be helpful:  
7 questions to ask about Tier 2 installation
When answering these questions, know that answering them “no,” isn’t a dead end! That is your
starting place! 
When answering the questions, write down the actions needed, identify who has the capacity to take that on and when, and list the
resources you have available to help! Creating a schedule can help ensure that planned actions are being followed through on. As
you can tell from the ﬁrst question, Tier 1 has a pivotal role to play in successfully implementing Tier 2.  You are going to review
that in more detail now! 
When answering the questions, write down the actions needed, identify who has the capacity to take that on and when, and list the
resources you have available to help! Creating a schedule can help ensure that planned actions are being followed through  in a
broad ligh. As you can tell from the ﬁrst question, Tier 1 has a pivotal role to play in successfully implementing Tier 2.  You are
going to review that in more detail now! 


Strengthening Your Tier 1 Supports, One Bridge at a Time
A bridge over a body of water

Tier 2 needs Tier 1. After all, Tier 1 is the literal foundation of the MTSS triangle. 
In a study of 776 schools in 244 school districts across 27 states, Kittleman et al. (2022) found that having a strong Tier 1
foundation implemented with ﬁdelity was the most substantial help in installing Tier 2 with success. Further, installing the
tiers over time, instead of all at once, positively impacted Tier 2 success. 
Other key pieces were: 
-Dedicated resources (e.g., time, materials, money) to Tier 2  
-Trained and coached school faculty and sta  
-Parents and caregivers’ engagement in Tier 2
Alongside Kittleman et al.’s (2022) ﬁndings, other researchers recommended having the following Tier 1 pieces solidiﬁed:  
-Expectations and rules established and contextualized across school settings
-Students actively supervised and given opportunities for responses that demonstrate their academic, behavioral,
and positive health and wellbeing
-Sata  and faculty o er pre-corrections and acknowledge students when they meet goals
-Deﬁned, well-known strategies available to correct errors
These recommendations represent ideals, and while we acknowledge that our schools may not always reach these lofty standards,
we all are committed to continuous improvement. You know that there will be students needing access to Tier 2 and Tier 3 supports
before either of those tiers is ready to launch. You know that if you wait for Tier 1 to be “perfect” before launching Tier 2, you will
most likely never get there. We cannot put o  supporting students in need because we think we still need to reach some vague,
undeﬁned level of “readiness.” 

Research recommends a strong Tier 1 foundation before Tier 2, and the need
for Tier 2 pressing. How can this challenge be addressed? 
While there are no straightforward answers to this question, here are some recommendations.
F I N D  Y O UR   C A PA C I T Y
T I E R   1   DATA
T I E R E D  F I DE L I T Y   I N V E N T O R Y
Start with simply ﬁnding out what you can do. Finding your capacity for implementation will help set your and your school’s
expectations (Hatton et al., 2020). We know that having 10–15% of students receiving Tier 2 support is a desired base rate, but that
might not reﬂect what your school actually needs. Find your base rate using data-based decision rules, which you’ll learn more about
later, from your data streams (e.g., attendance, achievement of academic goals, o ce discipline referrals, etc.). 
Ask yourself: How many students need Tier 2 support? And how many can we serve based on our interventions, resources, and sta ?
You may have an actual base rate of 7% instead of 10–15%, but only have the capacity to serve 4–5% of that 7%. That is where you
start! As Tier 2 implementation becomes more stable, you scale up to serve all students in need of Tier 2 support with your resources
and interventions.   
F I N D  Y O UR   C A PA C I T Y
T I E R   1   DATA
T I E R E D  F I DE L I T Y   I N V E N T O R Y
Focus on ensuring that your Tier 1 data systems are solidiﬁed before installing Tier 1. This is your universal screening data, school
records, o ce discipline referrals, teacher observations, and more. Focusing on your Tier 1 data collection and management is
helpful for Tier 2’s installation because Tier 2 requires your Tier 1 data, as well as other data routines which you’ll learn more about
later!  
F I N D  Y O UR   C A PA C I T Y
T I E R   1   DATA
T I E R E D  F I DE L I T Y   I N V E N T O R Y
Know where your Tier 1 supports are before installing Tier 2. To do this, you can use the Tiered Fidelity Inventory (TFI). It has three
surveys, one for each tier, and they can be used together or separately (PBIS, n.d.). While it’s been recommended to have 70–80% of
TFI items in place before Tier 2 implementation, we know that this isn’t always feasible. Like we said earlier, you can focus on
ensuring your Tier 1 data systems are ready and use the TFI to review that piece in particular! 
 
Download the TFI which offers information for developing an action plan
that guides implementation.   
Tiered Fidelity Inventory.pdf
3.9 MB
Implementing Tier 2 after Tier 1 can be challenging. The tiers overlap with one another while remaining distinct; they build on top
of each other while contributing something unique. It can be di cult to know when your school is ready. We hear you and
understand! 
As you prepare to install Tier 2, think through ways to avoid the common pitfalls school face when preparing and installing Tier 2,
shown in the slides below (Kirk, 2022; Kittleman et al., 2022):   


Pitfalls to Avoid

Pitfall 1
You need to know the student so you understand why the evidence-based interventions might work for that student.   

Pitfall 2

Assuming You Do Not Have Enough Time to Implement These Interventions
Tier 2 interventions are built on Tier 1 supports and integrated into your schoolwide system. Because you’re not
reinventing the wheel, implementing Tier 2 may not be as heavy a lift as you are thinking, especially when done in
teams.   

Believing That One Intervention Will Solve All Problems

Pitfall 3
Interventions are not “one-size-ﬁts-all." There are di erent interventions for di erent challenges, and you may
need to try multiple interventions before a need is met.

Being Scared of Data

Pitfall 4
Collect data and use it for your empowerment! If the data shows an intervention isn’t working, don’t take it
personally. Instead, use the data to adapt, change, or maintain an intervention as needed.
Well Done!
You've reviewed common pitfalls to avoid when preparing your Tier 2 journey. Again, the ultimate focus is
supporting students in the best way possible, and that goal is our guiding principle as we wrestle with the challenge
of Tier 2 implementation.


Who is Helping You to Build the Bridge: Finding Your Team
Know that installing and implementing Tier 2 is not a one-person job! The responsibility
does not rest on your shoulders alone. Installing and launching Tier 2 takes a group of
people. Whether your school has an abundance of teams or a few scattered
groupings, know that you’re not in this alone.
As we refer to “you” throughout the rest of this lesson, we’re referring to the collective group of people installing and
implementing Tier 2! Further, when we say, “MTSS teams,” we are referring to whoever has a role in installing and launching Tier
2. That may be a formally named team or a group of individuals. You'll be learning about MTSS teaming in the very next lesson, so
we will be brief here! The MTSS team is responsible for:   
-allocating the school’s resources to Tier 2 
-creating the schedules for Tier 2 interventions and training 
-collecting and monitoring data and implementation ﬁdelity 
-connecting students to resources 
-meeting regularly  
-staying up to date on Tier 2 training and professional development 
-contacting stakeholders (e.g., families, community partners, district educators, students) and sharing their Tier 2 plans
While there is no “one size ﬁts all” for what a team should look like, it can be extremely helpful to include school administration,
classroom educators, behavior specialists, and school counselors (Hatton et al., 2020; PBIS, n.d., Shurley, 2022). Like we said
earlier, you’ll be covering teams in more detail in the very next lesson! For now, let’s move forward to determining the Tier 2
resources you already have in place at your schools! 
Be mindful that teams may be formed with a context focus. For example, instead of having an integrated teaming approach
(e.g., a Tier 2 team addressing both the behavioral and academic needs of students), some schools may prefer to have
separate teams for behavior and academic support. However, we recommend prioritizing a single MTSS team where all
team members are based in one school MTSS team. This uni ed team provides consistency, coordination, ef ciency, and
collaboration in the implementation of interventions and support across all tiers. 


Assembling the Tool Box: Knowing What You Have and What You Need
A man looking at map in front of a bridge
Before installing Tier 2, you need to know what you already have in place (Hatton et al., 2020; Shurley, 2022).
To start, you can resource map!
Lay out each intervention your school already has in a spreadsheet; include the name of the intervention, what area or need it
targets, the grade level it is appropriate for, when it was acquired and ﬁrst used, and the date of most recent training. If you want a
refresher or are interested in learning more, there is a more detailed lesson on resource mapping in our Core MTSS course!  
Having an intervention inventory that outlines the exact limitation the intervention responds to is key for e ciency. This way,
when a student is identiﬁed as needing Tier 2 support, you can quickly examine the interventions available for that student’s need
(Powers et al., 2020). 
We’ve attached a template adapted from the Intervention Central templates (2018) that you can use to create your resource map.
You can see at the screenshot below (click to enlarge) where we've included Check In, Check Out (CICO) as an example; you'll learn
more about CICO in upcoming lessons!
Intervention Inventory Template.xlsx
9.4 KB
Intervention inventory template
After you lay out the interventions you already have, think through what you need. Do you need a better intervention for teaching
social skills? Would it be helpful to have interventions more targeted to math?
As you think through what needs the school has, consider the demographics, population, and geographic location of your school.
Think through your student body’s needs as well. 
After you’ve outlined what you need, assign a schedule within your MTSS team to ﬁnd options and report back on them! If, on the
other hand, you have too many interventions and you realize some haven’t been used for quite some time, streamline! Narrow your
interventions down to the most e ective and appropriate for your student body.  
If you’re starting from scratch or need help identifying what resources you want, plan for 3-4 interventions each for
academics, behavior, and positive health and wellbeing. When brainstorming new interventions to adopt or reviewing your
existing interventions, remember that they need to be readily accessible, effective, evidence-based, and low effort to
implement. 
Do you need some inspiration ﬁnding interventions? Here are three fantastic resources to use! 
Best Evidence Encyclopedia o ers reports on interventions for reading, mathematics, writing, science, and more! It is linked
below.

Home
This website aims to empower educators with evidence on proven programs. Blog archive from the
late Robert Slavin, who served as the Director of the Center for Research and Reform in Education at
Johns Hopkins University See Robert Slavin's blog archive about educational policy, research, and
innovation. Program Reviews
READ MORE BEST EVIDENCE ENCYCLOPEDIA 
What Works Clearinghouse hosts practice guides, intervention reports, reviews of individual research studies, and data from
reviews. Its intervention reports can be broken down by intervention, strength of research, tier level, subject, and more! This is a
great resource if you are looking for inspiration. 

WWC | Find What Works!
As an initiative of the U.S. Department of Education's Institute of Education Sciences (IES), the What
Works Clearinghouse (WWC) was created in 2002 to be a central and trusted source of scientiﬁc
evidence for what works in education.
READ MORE ED 
The National Center on Intensive Interventions' Tool Charts are detailed instruments to review your academic and behavioral
interventions and progress monitoring resources. It breaks interventions down by strength of evidence, grade level, information,
the behaviors or academic limitations that are targeted, and the type of review that was conducted. It even allows you to compare
tools!

Tools Chart Overview
Tools charts display expert ratings on the technical rigor of assessments and interventions. Products
are reviewed by an external Technical Review Committee of experts. Products are rated against
established criteria and not compared to each other or ranked. Charts are updated during a call for
submissions.
READ MORE INTENSIVEINTERVENTION 
Once you know what you have and what you need, you can begin your review of the student identiﬁcation process!


Where Are You Building a Bridge? Identifying Students
The students you’re identifying for Tier 2 supports occupy an “in-between” space. They are not currently exhibiting extreme
challenges, as noted by Powers et al. (2020), but they are at risk of escalating and are not being supported by Tier 1 su ciently.
What does your screening process look like now? It may occur at speciﬁc times throughout the academic year, such as term starts
and endings, or your screeners may exist just for academics. We want a clearly deﬁned identiﬁcation plan for all students, and in
this section, you are going to learn more about identifying these students in the middle.  
Before we go into formal methods of identifying students for Tier 2 supports, we want to acknowledge what you are already doing.

Informal Methods
Educators know when a student is struggling. We acknowledged this at the very beginning—educators can tell when a student is
thriving or falling behind. Educators are developing, maintaining, and even restoring relationships with their students every day.
That relationship is, in and of itself, a primary way you're already identifying when students need Tier 2 supports. Dr. Lucille Eber,
the experienced PBIS and MTSS practitioner we met earlier, sums it up well:  
“
"Most teachers don’t go, ‘Oh, I’m going into a Tier 2 mode with this kid for reading!’...They feel comfortable just
naturally ramping it up. That’s what we want to get to with multi-tiered systems."”
Dr. Lucille Eber
Like Dr. Eber said, you’re most likely not thinking, “Oh, let me move Janice up to Tier 2 supports now!” Instead, it’s much more
natural. You are “informally” understanding when students are having emotional, academic, and behavioral problems and you take
steps towards enhancing the relationship with the child to support them. 
You notice when Matthew has been silent and withdrawn for a couple of weeks, and you decide to check in with him before he
leaves at the end of each day. 
You picked up on Fernando’s embarrassment and shyness about reading in front of class, so you decided to move him into a
reading group with other students who needed additional support. 
This is identifying students! You notice something is o  so you allocate more e ort in your relationship with that student. 
We don’t want this process to stop; instead, we simply want to name it and merge it with data-based assessments as well! 
The informal process is often the starting place of Tier 2 identiﬁcation. Once you notice this shift, you continue emphasizing your
relationship with the student while recommending them for a more formal assessment. 

Formal Identi cation
When identifying students for Tier 2 supports, you want the data you collect to be accurate for each part of a student’s being:
academics, behavior, and emotional wellbeing (Intervention Central, 2018). Key formal streams of data you can use to identify
students who are at risk are listed below (PBIS, n.d.). 
-Screening scores
-Teacher nomination*
-Parent nomination*
-Self-nomination*
-Support service recommendations
-Assessments (e.g., SAEBRs)
-Universal screenings
-office discipline referrals (ODRs)

*Here is a Google form below that you can use or adapt for an easy, accessible
student referral nomination from teachers, parents or caregivers, or the
student themselves!
GOOGLE DOCS
Student for Tier 2 Supports Referral 
Sign in to Google to save your progress. Learn more
* Indicates required question
Your Name:  *
Your answer
St udent  Name:  *
Student for Tier 2 Supports Referral
VIEW ON GOOGLE DOCS 
Ideally, a designated team is responsible for reviewing the data and making decisions based on it. If this is not something your
school currently has in place, make a note to bring it up at the next appropriate time, such as during a school administration
meeting or when you see your MTSS coordinator down the hall. 
It can be helpful to have software that collects and analyzes data. This can be done manually, using an Excel spreadsheet, or
through a fee-based software, such as SWIS or eDoctrina. SWIS, an app from PBIS, is a tool that has been used  in Tier 2 Data
collection (Hatton et al., 2020). eDoctrina is another popular tool that your district or school may have! If you want to learn more
about SWIS or eDoctrina, visit the links below.  

PBISApps | SWIS
Collect o ce discipline referral data and make active, data-driven decisions to create the kind of
school where every student is successful.
READ MORE PBISAPPS 

Data Tools to Implement MTSS and RTI with Fidelity | eDoctrina
The Daunting Task for Administrators One of your most essential, yet complicated, responsibilities
are supporting the wide variety of learning needs of all students. Data-driven education practices
continue to revolutionize the way we approach learning. Reams of data are only helpful if you can
quickly see patterns.
READ MORE EDOCTRINA 
If your school decides to use a data aggregating system, ensure that you account for the entire student. By that, we mean thinking
through the “why” behind the data. This is especially true for students who experience a sudden shift in behavior or attitude that
impacts their likelihood of being reviewed for Tier 2 services.  
The data collected for student identiﬁcation should answer the following questions from Resa (n.d.):
The four questions data should answer
Once you’ve collected your data, you need to know what to do with it. When you have multiple streams of data coming in at once,
putting the pieces together can be overwhelming. That’s where data decision rules come in. 

Data Decision Rules
You’ll learn more about data-informed decision-making in Lesson 2; for now, let’s have a brief overview! 
Data decision rules help you know when to consider students for Tier 2 services (Powers et al., 2020). These are rules that outline
which streams of data will be monitored and which decision is required based on the data. It is highly recommended to create an
identiﬁcation plan. Your identiﬁcation plan is a tangible, formal resource with your school that prevents confusion and aids
expediency when examining a student for Tier 2 services. It does this by outlining the:
An opened toolbox
-method of data identiﬁcation
-purpose and process of the identiﬁcation
-who is responsible for checking that source of data
-how the data is used to make decisions
Here is a template adapted from Hatton et al. (2020) for you to use, as well as a screenshot of what it looks like! Click to enlarge the
screenshot.
Data Identi cation Plan.xlsx
9.3 KB
Data identiﬁcation plan
When using your data, it's important to triangulate it. Data triangulation is when you use multiple, usually 3+, streams of data
before making a decision about a speciﬁc phenomenon. Data triangulation in assessing whether students are eligible for Tier 2
supports is not black and white. Here are some examples. Click to enlarge.
Three examples of students with potential Tier 2 eligibility based on data
We can't answer those questions for your school because data decision rules created for you will be unique from the data decision
rules of another school within your district—that’s okay! 

Data decision rules are meant to be formatted to the needs, baseline, and culture of your
school, which means that they will change as your school does! 
As you formalize your data decision rules, you might realize your school relies too heavily on ODRs and doesn't catch students with
internalizing concerns, or that your school relies solely on teacher nomination, and misses students otherwise identiﬁed by
screeners.
When you adapt your data decision rules, you are simply shifting your position further
across the bridge, not stepping away entirely.
Within data decision rules, certain pieces of data can be given more weight than others. For example, a self-nomination with only 1
ODR can prompt assessing a student for Tier 2 services, or a self-nomination with a teacher nomination might prompt an
assessment. Ideally, all data streams should be utilized together. However, if your data decision rules for Tier 2 are in their
beginnings, you want to consider at least two di erent data sources at a minimum (a.k.a., triangulating your data!).
Now that you’ve reviewed and updated your student identiﬁcation plan, you need to know what interventions are appropriate and
available!  


Picking the Right River: Picking the Intervention Based on Student Need
You’ve got your inventory of interventions. 
You’ve collected the data and analyzed it. 
Out of all of the interventions available, how do you know which one is best? You can use the “Problem Solving Cycle” from
Pechacheck & Ehlers (2019) to ﬁgure that out!
The problem solving cycle
When picking an intervention for your students, know that there is no magical “ﬁx-all.” Each intervention has its strengths and
limitations, and each intervention may not work for every student. Adapting or changing an intervention for a student isn’t a
failure; it’s progress! 
While we will brie y introduce Tier 2 interventions later on in this lesson, you’ll receive a deeper dive on them in this
course. The resources we linked above from Best Evidence Encyclopedia, What Works Clearinghouse, and the toolkits from
the National Center on Intensive Interventions are great places to look if you're curious!
As you’re looking at new interventions or reviewing the ones you have, look for interventions that increase(PBIS, n.d.):
-Instruction and practice with students' social skills, behavior, and academics
- adult interaction
-Opportunities for positive reinforcement
-Opportunities for pre-correction
-Focus on the function of the student's actions or inactions


Final Thoughts on Pre-Installation Steps
As you reﬂect on your pre-installation steps for Tier 2, we want to point you back to the questions from the Tier 2 Systems
Readiness Guide (PBIS, n.d.): 
 7 questions to ask about Tier 2 installation
As we’ve said before, answering any of those questions with a “no” or “not yet” isn’t a sign to stop Tier 2 altogether. It is simply
a guide to areas of your Tier 2 preparation that might need more work! Don’t let that scare you. After these pre-installation steps
are completed, you can move forward into installing Tier 2!


Installation Steps


Putting One Foot In Front of the Other


Planning Out Your Day: Setting Up a Schedule for Delivering Tier 2 Interventions
If possible, it is helpful to avoid starting new interventions in the middle of the school year unless there is a clear, data-informed
need (Shurley, 2022). Instead, work with your administration to allocate resources and sta  to intervention implementation at the
beginning of the year. Since sta  and faculty need to be trained in delivering these interventions, o ering professional
development courses early in the school year will prepare sta  when interventions are needed later!  
Ideally, you’d be planning during the summer or even the school year ahead to create your Tier 2 intervention schedule. However,
we know that life often doesn’t work in ideals. As we make the suggestions for scheduling, know that they’re just suggestions.
What matters is getting support to our students! 
Because each school is unique, we cannot o er a schedule template of: “Monday, at 11:40 AM, conduct ______ intervention; at
2:13 PM, go to the gymnasium and observe _______ intervention.” Your more detailed, day-to-day schedule is created by you,
since you know your school best!
Click through the tabs below for scheduling ideas that may jumpstart the scheduling process (Intervention Central, 2018;
Massachusetts Department of Elementary & Secondary Education, n.d.):  
Thirty to forty- ve minutes are set aside each day
for Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions. Students
receiving only Tier 1 support can continue in their
normal routines.
Schedule Tier 1 and Tier 2 activities at the
same time in a “block opportunity." This can be
enrichment for students only receiving Tier 1
supports, such as re-reviewing core concepts
and applying them. For students receiving
Tier 2 support, this can be instruction and
intervention such as extra instruction for
students that focuses on their limitations in an
intervention with a variety of personnel
involved.
Students attend electives before or after
school and use the freed-up time for Tier 2
interventions or instruction.
Students using Tier 2 for academic supports have
their time on speci c academic subjects extended
for the intervention. If needed, you can schedule
longer recesses or lunch times for students
requiring Tier 2 supports so that the intervention
can take place during that extra bit of time.
Coordinate a study hall with Tier 2 interventions.
While students receiving only Tier 1 services
participate in study hall as usual, students
supported by Tier 2 interventions will use their
study hall time to participate in their
interventions.
Students take a core course online so that Tier
2 support can occur during that class’s in-
person time.
Schedule personnel on a three, four, six, or
eight-day cycle so that there is variety and
respect for teachers’ busy schedules.
It is always helpful to consider how long an intervention’s individual meetings and overall course take to administer when
planning how the intervention ﬁts into the school-day. If you start a schedule for implementing interventions but must change it
due to an online learning day, teacher substitutions, or other reasons, that’s okay! 


Ensuring the Necessary Materials & Resources are Available
Three types of Tier 2 resources needed
 

Communicating with Parents and Guardians
During the time between a student being assessed for Tier 2 services and placed on an intervention, that student's parents or
caregivers should be contacted by the school. You can do this using the communication preferences indicated by the family:
emailing, calls, or in-person chats during pick-up or drop-o . 
To provide the parent or caregiver as much necessary information as possible, it can be helpful to ﬁll out the following form
(attached below) and send it to the parents and caregivers, as well as the student!
Tier 2 Intervention Plan template
Tier 2 Intervention Plan.docx
13.7 KB


Systems for Collecting & Reviewing Tier 2 Data
While we will review progress monitoring and evaluation later on, it is important to have systems in place during installation to
conduct that progress monitoring. That is what we are discussing here!
It is extremely beneﬁcial for students receiving Tier 2 services to have their interventions monitored at least twice a month. This is
to monitor the students’ progress, as well as knowing whether the intervention is being implemented with ﬁdelity. With your data
decision rules, you want to know your data routines. 
Data Routines: what data you review and when you review it. 
This shows you which interventions are working and how well you are implementing them. Data should answer the following
questions at di erent steps in the Tier 2 installation process (Shurley, 2022):  
-“Have we identiﬁed who needs additional targeted skill support?”  
-“Have we grouped students by similar skills or functions?”  
-“Are we implementing the plan as it was designed?”  
-“What are the progress monitoring data saying about the intervention and the skill gap?”  
To create your data routine, you can follow the steps below and adapt them as needed (Resa, n.d.):   


Creating Your Data Routine

Identify the progress monitoring tool(s) you want to use.
Step 1
An assessment your school can use to monitor how well Tier 2 is being implemented is the Tiered Fidelity Inventory.
We’ve attached it earlier in this lesson as a PDF for you to download! 
Step 2

Train staff and faculty on administering and scoring assessments and collecting and
interpreting progress data.
This is especially important for educators as they are interacting with the interventions most frequently! 

Conduct progress monitoring weekly or biweekly.
Step 3
You want to use multiple streams of data monitoring, so ensure there are ample opportunities to do so (e.g., allotted
time in educators’ schedules, observation sessions for an intervention, etc.). Typically, it is recommended to have a
total of 5-7 distinct data points from at least 2–3 data streams about an intervention’s e ectiveness before making
any decisions. If it appears that the intervention isn’t working, ask:
“What are the barriers to the student’s learning?”  
“What instructional supports can be provided to remove or counteract those barriers?”  
“What other data points are needed to understand what’s going on?”  
Step 4

De ne a method of creating report summaries.
This can be done using software, such as PBIS' SWIS, or in an Excel spreadsheet.  
Step 5

Set a schedule for reviewing the progress monitoring data within a team setting.
These meetings will focus on making decisions about students staying on, changing, or ceasing their Tier 2
intervention. If an intervention isn’t working, these meetings are a helpful setting for problem-solving! When you’re
reviewing the results of an intervention, ask:
How many students were identiﬁed for Tier 2 and Tier 3? How many were identiﬁed in the fall vs. the spring?  
How many students achieved their tier goals?  
Did the school meet its schoolwide goals? Or make progress towards them?  
Were the interventions implemented with ﬁdelity? Protocols adhered to?  
What concerns did sta  express?   
Well Done!
These steps empower your team to build bridges to success, ensuring all students have the support they need to
excel.
We’ve adapted a ﬂowchart of questions from the Progress Monitoring Toolkit (Illuminate Education, 2021) for you to use when
reviewing data! The questions and their respective answers will help you determine what next steps are needed for your students.
Click to enlarge. 
The progress monitoring ﬂowchart
Now that you’ve set up your Tier 2 schedule, collected the necessary materials and resources, communicated with parents and
caregivers, and established a system for data monitoring you are ready to launch Tier 2! 


Launching Tier 2


Putting Tier 2 into Practice
We’ve talked a lot about your intervention inventory, resources to ﬁnd new interventions, and what critical features Tier 2
interventions should have. Depending on your familiarity with Tier 2, you may already know a few interventions o  the top of your
head, or you may have no idea what we’re referring to. No worries. While we will go over certain key interventions in much more
depth in later lessons, here is a brief overview of the interventions you could launch with your own students (Hatton et al., 2020).


Mentoring Programs
Mentoring programs are one of the most common Tier 2 interventions (Rodriguez et al., 2015). Mentors can function as friends,
role models, tutors, or all of the above. Mentoring is a collaboration between community members, other students, and school
faculty and sta  to give mentee students a positive relationship. You’ll learn a lot more about them in Lesson 3: Mentoring-Based
Programs, but for now, just know that mentoring programs promote positive academic outcomes (Hart et al., 2021) and reduce
internalizing and externalizing struggles in students (Cook et al., 2015; Fiat et al., 2017; Hart et al., 2021). 
Plus, the value of the relationship between the mentor and mentee cannot be overstated (Kirk, 2022; Strawhun et al., 2014).
Relationship-building is a key part of many Tier 2 interventions, exempliﬁed by the next two: 2x10 and Check In, Check Out! 

Check In, Check Out (CICO)
CICO is a mentoring program and it is a great tool to start with if you’re creating your Tier 2 inventory! A school sta  member acts
as a mentor to a student and o ers unconditional positive regard and feedback to a student in the morning (check in) and
afternoon (check out). The mentor is always positive with the student. When checking in or out, the mentor reviews the student’s
behavior, academic, or positive health and wellbeing Tier 2 goals and reviews them with the student!  
Check In, Check Out has shown promise in decreasing students’ undesired behavior (Maggin et al., 2015; Todd et al., 2008),
increasing students’ alignment with schoolwide expectations (Hawken et al., 2015), and promoting social engagement between
students (Laging et al., 2018). While interviewing stakeholders about CICO, Swoszowski et al. (2017) quote the following from a
teacher discussing who would beneﬁt from Check In, Check Out:  
“I think all of them would beneﬁt, to be honest! The kids like attention, they like having someone to come to and encourage them,
and it’s like their person, you know” (p. 115).  
You’ll learn more about Check In, Check Out in Lesson 3: Mentoring-Based Programs 
2 x 10
In 2x10, all educators and school sta  support students by spending two minutes per day, for ten consecutive school days,
connecting with a student individually. These connections can occur any time in the day and are simply positive interactions. 2x10
can improve school climate and students’ sense of belonging in schools (Woolf, n.d.), while also decreasing undesired behaviors
(Rogers, 2013). Here is an anonymous anecdote from a blog, shared with permission by the classroom veteran and instructional
teacher, Angela Watson:   
“I tried it [2x10] yesterday and today with one of my ﬁrst-grade boys, who has already been written up twice for hitting since the
beginning of the school year. For the rest of the day and today he was much [more] attentive in class. Today he chose to read right
next to my table during read-to-self. I also tried it today with a girl who is repeating ﬁrst grade, is on meds for ADHD, and possibly
will be diagnosed with ODD. Since the beginning of the year, she has needed constant reminders to stay on task. After the chat, she
needed very few reminders to stay on task. Yes, I had assessing paperwork I could have been doing instead of talking, but I learned
so much more from my 2-minute chat with my students. Thank you again, for reminding me what teaching is all about … making
connections and building relationships.” 

Distinguishing between 2 x 10 and Mentoring Programs
You may be thinking that mentoring programs and 2x10 are quite similar; however, each of these o ers distinct avenues for
supporting students, addressing their needs, and enhancing their overall educational experience. The 2x10 strategy centers
around brief but impactful daily interactions, while mentoring programs entail more extensive and structured relationships. With
the table below, let's explore the characteristics, beneﬁts, and applications of both the 2x10 and mentoring programs. (Click to
enlarge) 
A table distinguishing between 2x10 and mentoring programs


Small Groups
A group of children in a circle with their hands on the ﬂoor
Small groups are a core piece of Tier 2. They’re less of a speciﬁc intervention and more of a speciﬁc format for interventions to take
place in (Brown, 2016; Kirk, 2022; Oeser, 2022; Shurley, 2022). They are usually for no more than 10 students who need support in
the same area. These groups are ideally based on curricula, and now is a great time to use your resources such as What Works
Clearinghouse to ﬁnd one!  
In more formal small groups, the skills or behaviors are taught just like academics; tell, show, model. Informal examples include
the Lunch Bunch, where small groups eat together to work on social or friendship skills. While many interventions take place in
small groups, Tier 2 interventions can also take place in individual therapies or co-teaching and co-teaming, which you’ll learn
more about in the very next lesson!
When you introduce any intervention to the students and their parents or caregivers, you want to be speciﬁc about what need(s)
the intervention is targeting and how the intervention responds to that need. Throughout the intervention, ensure regular
communication with parents and caregivers. This can be in the form of progress reports at the end of the week, emails, phone
calls, or materials sent home with the student.
This is just a brief overview of some types of Tier 2 interventions! You’ll learn more throughout the rest of this course. For now,
let’s walk through a scenario of picking an intervention for a student!
Your Tier 2 interventions are ﬁnally up and running! Students are in targeted, intentional small groups or paired with mentors for
their needs in academics, behavior, and positive health and wellbeing. Now what? You monitor the student's progress and the
intervention's implementation! But ﬁrst, let's ﬁnish up this section with a knowledge check.


Progress Monitoring & Evaluation


Maintaining the Structural Integrity of the Bridge
Golden Gate Bridge
The experience of crossing a bridge can range from exhilarating to benign to terrifying. A fear of heights, creaky chains, or busted
boards can be the di erence between quickly getting from one place to another and being frozen in fear. We at the SBHA never
want schools’ experience with Tier 2 to be the latter! To ensure that using Tier 2 to bridge supports is a smooth, e ective process
requires monitoring and evaluating Tier 2 progress. 


To ensure that students are receiving the support they need in their Tier 2 interventions, it is
essential to track their progress and implement the intervention with  delity.
We previously outlined how to set up systems for tracking data during all stages of Tier 2. You also may be familiar with progress
monitoring, especially if you've already taken our Core MTSS course! If that's the case, this can be a refresher. 
Progress monitoring is built on that speciﬁc data collection while zooming out to look at the student and the intervention as a
whole. This can be done in a variety of ways, such as re-assessing skills or making changes in teacher observations, homework, or
screeners. When thinking about progress monitoring, think about forms of data that are quick, skill-based, valid, reliable,
sensitive to small changes in short amounts of time, and normed to the student population (Shurley, 2022). Progress monitoring
measures speciﬁc skill growth and tells us if an intervention has worked!  
Progress monitoring tools should help you answer the following questions (Resa, n.d.):
“Which students are demonstrating a positive response to the supplemental instruction and intervention being
provided to them? Which are demonstrating moderate to poor responses to the instruction and intervention?
Have we checked the ﬁdelity of intervention implementation for the students not progressing?"
“Which students may need more intensive services? And, which students may be ready to either address other
areas of need or transition back to receiving Tier 1 instruction only?”  
“Are students who are demonstrating progress at Tier 2 based on progress monitoring data also demonstrating
progress on their Tier 1 assessments? If not, why not?” 
While the tools you use will depend on what intervention is in place, here are a few resources you can review for general help in
progress monitoring

Direct Observation of Student or Intervention
Direct observation of the student or intervention is simply observing them in real time. While this includes overall observations
from the trained school faculty or sta  member, it goes beyond that. Two examples of data-based direct observation are frequency
counts and time sampling.
-Frequency counts are where an educator records the number of times a behavior occurs in a given time period
-Time sampling occurs when a behavior is observed at a speciﬁc time, and each time the behavior does or does not occur at
that speciﬁc time is recorded (e.g., Jill did not swear at her teacher at 1:00 PM, Jill swore at her teacher at 1:10 PM, etc.)
We've attached a PowerPoint presentation from PBIS (2016) that reviews progress monitoring, including direct observation in
more depth for you to review!
PBIS Progress Monitoring.pdf
2.6 MB

Behavioral Progress Monitoring
This guide is in the format of a journal article and it goes over speciﬁc strategies for progress monitoring, including:
-systematic direct observation
-intervention-based measures
-direct behavior rating
And the actual steps for data collection and evaluation! This guide provides an overview of more than just progress monitoring. It
also lists common Tier 2 interventions, such as Check In, Check Out and social skills instruction, and their core components
alongside other articles and resources for you to peruse!
A Step by Step Guide to Tier 2 Behavioral Progress Monitoring.pdf
213.4 KB

Direct Behavior Rating
Using the presentation and articles listed above, you use this attached direct behavior rating sheet as a template to adjust or a
standard form to use!
Direct Behavior Rating Form.pdf
93.1 KB

MTSS Toolkit from Illuminate Education (2021)
This is an overarching toolkit for all tiers, but it hosts thorough questions, examples, and resources for Tier 2 progress monitoring
throughout. This includes examples of intervention plan forms, assessment plans, and agendas for progress monitoring review
meetings!
MTSS Toolkit from Illuminate Education.pdf
1 MB
We’ve covered a lot of material thus far! The combination of steps, di erent resources, and possible ideas for interventions and
data monitoring can feel like an impossible mountain to climb. We understand that!
To give you some encouragement that this is possible, we’ll walk through a practical example of implementing Tier 2 at a high
school level adapted from Morris et al., 2020. First, let’s listen to Kaci Fleetwood, a state coordinator for MTSS and a faculty
member at the University of Nevada, Reno, reﬂect on her experiences implementing tiers in schools!
With those reﬂections from Kaci in mind, let's look at a practical example of implementing Tier 2 at a high school level!


An Example of Tier 2 at a High School Level
This is just an example of how Tier 2 could be implemented at a school; the actual process will certainly vary from school to school.
With this example, our hope is that you realize that Tier 2 is feasible, important, and unique to each school and its student
population. Let's go!


Kerrington High School's Tier 2 Journey

The Beginning

Phase 1
Incentivized by administration and supported by the district, sta  and faculty at Kerrington High School spent the
last year bolstering their Tier 1 supports. They built a bank of Tier 1 data through universal screeners, established
schoolwide expectations, and prioritized student and sta  positive health and wellbeing. Family engagement
required more work to reach the school’s goals, but Kerrington High School’s Tier 1 data systems were a solid
foundation for Tier 2 to begin its installation, as indicated by the school’s Tiered Fidelity Inventory review!  

Kerrington High School's Tier 2 Process

Phase 2
In June and July, school administration recruited a team to lead the school in installing Tier 2. This involved emails to
educators, counselors, families, and sta  with clear descriptions of what the role would entail. For those working
within the school, administration insured that the recruited educators, sta , and counselors were compensated by
removing other activities from their schedule or ensuring pay for out-of-hours meetings. 
Now assembled, the school’s Tier 2 team began meeting to review key pieces of the school community that would
inﬂuence how Tier 2 was installed. While the core elements of Tier 2 stay the same, Kerrington's unique background
inﬂuenced how it adapted those core elements.

Factors to Consider

Phase 3
The Tier 2 team reviewed factors such as the school’s size, location, schedule, number of students needing Tier 2
services, and the school’s current resources. Special considerations were given to how many students needed
screening, factors that inﬂuence dropout rates, and the emphasis on internalizing behaviors over externalizing in
high school students. 
Common barriers to Tier 2 implementation in high school were addressed, such as teachers’ potential view that high
school students “knowing how to behave by now” or students’ desire for intense independence.

Responses to the Barriers

Phase 4
To respond to those potential roadblocks, the Tier 2 team planned professional development courses for educators
early in the school year to review high school students’ developmental and behavioral needs. The Tier 2 team took
professional development courses even further. Because high school students have multiple di erent teachers, the
Tier 2 team prioritized educator training on recognizing academic, behavioral, and positive health and wellbeing
needs of students, and the corresponding Tier 2 interventions. 

Creating the Inventory

Phase 5
An inventory of current Tier 2 interventions was created, headed up by an administrative assistant and school
counselor. Using the inventory, the Tier 2 team reviewed how certain interventions could be adapted to meet the
students’ level of independence. 
One plan was to mold Check In, Check Out, to ﬁt both students arriving on the bus and those who drive themselves to
school. The Tier 2 team also reemphasized setting clear schoolwide expectations on academics, behavior, and
positive health and wellbeing for students because classroom expectations and rules change frequently for students
in their many classrooms.  

Data Decision Rules

Phase 6
To identify students for Tier 2 supports, the team put in place the following criteria to assess students for Tier 2
interventions:  
-less than 80% attendance 
-higher-than-school's-average number of D or F grades 
-2+ o ce disciplinary referrals for behavior in 30 days 
- 3+ school nurse visits in 60 days 
- teacher, parent, or self-referrals.  
Because high school students possess a higher level of developmental maturity and academic capability, the Tier 2
team integrated daily progress reports completed by the students into their progress monitoring alongside re-
assessing skills, observation, grades, and direct behavior ratings.  

Conclusion
As Kerrington High School rolled out their Tier 2 installation, they remained open to change based on data and
feedback. As with their Tier 1 foundation, the Tier 2 team knew that Tier 2 was not a destination, but a journey!
Great work!

Let's review the lesson.
Just like Tier 1 is a foundation to Tier 2, this lesson serves as your foundation for the rest of the course. You learned:
-As the bridge between Tier 1 and Tier 3 supports, Tier 2 is for students who are struggling but are not exhibiting
the externalizing or internalizing behaviors that demonstrate a need for Tier 3 supports.
-Before installing Tier 2, it is helpful to solidify Tier 1 supports, establish a team, review what resources you have
and need, and know how students will be identiﬁed for Tier 2 and what Tier 2 interventions are needed.
-When installing Tier 2, a schedule for delivering Tier 2 interventions, communicating with families, and collecting
and reviewing data ensure that Tier 2 interventions can start with ease.  
-Tier 2 is launched through speciﬁc interventions, such as mentoring programs (e.g., 2x10, CICO) and small
groups.  
-fMonitoring Tier 2 interventions can look like direct observation, behavioral progress monitoring, direct behavior
ratings, or pre-established tools like the MTSS Toolkit or PBIS Progress Monitoring, among others.  
Before you head into your next lesson on teaming and data-informed decisions, remember that Tier 2 is not reinventing the
wheel, or something you do on your own. We’ve got the resources and coaches to help you, and you’ve got your team, skills,
and school.

@@@@@MTSS Teams Making Data-informed Decisions
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 5
MTSS Teams Making Data-informed Decisions


Outcomes:
1. Consider the roles, responsibilities, and functions of MTSS teams at the Tier 2 level
2. Describe the process of identifying, gathering, and analyzing data
3. Consider key factors in selection of and implementation of Tier 2 interventions


MTSS Teams and Data-informed Decision Making


 Making Decisions at the Tier 2 Level
In your ﬁrst lesson, you covered a substantial amount of information about Tier 2! From a series of steps and various resources, to
potential strategies for selecting and implementing interventions, these may seem like a challenge to implement.
We acknowledge that it can be overwhelming! However, you are not alone! One way to support your implementation of Tier 2
supports is to work in teams and to make data-informed decisions. 
Bridge over stream in forest
Think of a team making data-informed decisions at Tier 2 as an engineering team  that specializes in bridge building. A team  that
is skilled at drafting blueprints, hiring the right partners, and ﬁnding the right materials can signiﬁcantly ease the process of
bridge building. Put di erently, a team with the right expertise, training, and communication skills can e ectively identify and
address the needs of students at Tier 2—preventing negative outcomes while promoting positive mental health, growth, and
development.   


In the  owchart below, the process of data-informed decision making on
MTSS teams is outlined (adapted from Pool et al., 2012). 









Forming Teams and Assigning Responsibilities
The first step in using teams is to determine who the members will be. Teams should include multidisciplinary members who can work
together to select and implement appropriate interventions for students who require targeted support.
For teams to be effective, each member should have assigned roles and responsibilities. For example, one team member might record the
meeting or take notes, while another team member might be responsible for bringing data to the meeting. Agreeing on these roles in advance
of each meeting can increase efficiency and keep team members on the same page. 


Regular Team Meetings
Team meetings should be held every other week, formal or informal, for at least an hour. For efficiency, teams should follow a consistent and
specific agenda (it is helpful to share this agenda with the team prior to the meeting). This will help you to stay on time and make sure all
essential topics are discussed. 
At the end of the meeting, the next meeting should be scheduled, and new tasks should be assigned as needed. 


Communication and Collaboration
Communication and collaboration are essential in and outside of team meetings. Teams function more efficiently when everyone
communicates clearly and frequently so that everyone is on the same page. Communication and collaboration with the rest of school
personnel about meeting decisions are also essential for the entire school to understand the intervention processes.   


Gathering and Reviewing Data
In the meetings, team members review data about students. This could be results of universal screeners, academic or behavioral assessments,
teacher/parent feedback, or other sources of information. 


Intervention Implementation
Using this data, teams then decide if interventions are needed, and, if so, which intervention strategy (whether behavioral or academic) could
be most effective for student needs. Then, interventions are implemented. 


Progress Monitoring
While interventions are being implemented, progress monitoring data is collected to examine the intervention’s impact on student outcomes
and the fidelity of the intervention that is being implemented. This data helps to answer the following two questions:
Is the intervention being implemented as intended? 
Is the student benefiting from the intervention?

Data-informed Decisions
Based on the progress monitoring data, teams make decisions about next steps. In general, teams may decide to continue an intervention,
adjust as needed, end the intervention, or increase to Tier 3 support. 
In this lesson, you will go over each step of this process. Keep going to get
started with learning about forming teams! 
C O NT I NU E


MTSS Teams


The Builders Behind the Bridge


Forming Teams and Assigning Responsibilities
The ﬁrst critical element of Tier 2 systems is e ective teaming (Bruhn et al., 2020). MTSS teams work collaboratively to provide
targeted support to students, families, and school personnel. They identify students in need of mental health, behavioral, and
academic interventions using data, such as assessments measuring strengths and weaknesses. They also develop and implement
these targeted interventions, monitor student progress, measure ﬁdelity of interventions, and provide professional development
to other educators in the school to help them better support struggling students.
Overall, the goal of teams is to help students cope with any challenges they may be facing and to enhance academic success.
Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed people can change
the world; indeed, it’s the only thing that ever has.
Margaret Mead, American cultural anthropologist

MTSS Team Members
MTSS teams should have a leader, be small enough to meet regularly, and include professionals with various expertise (Bruhn et
al., 2020). 
Team members should include professionals who have knowledge of students (e.g., classroom teachers), have behavioral
expertise (e.g., special educator, behavioral analyst), and have administrative authority (e.g., principal). Due to the presence of
numerous societal challenges, limited resources, and a signiﬁcant need for shared responsibility (Atkins et al., 2003), a growing
number of schools are collaborating with communities to provide comprehensive interventions that support both academic
development and the wellbeing of students (Kury & Kury, 2006). Therefore, before examining di erent professionals, be mindful
that these professionals may not only be school personnel but also include non-school personnel like community-employed
professionals (Weist et al., 2012). 
Teams may involve the following professionals from your community:






School Social Workers
School social workers provide support for students and families who are experiencing social, emotional, or behavioral challenges. They work
with teachers and other school staff to implement interventions and support strategies. Social workers are also knowledgeable about
community resources! 

School Psychologists
School psychologists provide assessments, consultations, and interventions for students with various needs. They can also work with teachers
and other school staff to implement classroom interventions and support strategies.

Community-employed Professionals
When working in school settings, community-employed professionals can be organized into teams that collaborate with other school staff,
such as teachers and administrators, to provide comprehensive mental health services to students. 

Teachers
Teachers work with the mental health team to implement classroom interventions and support strategies. They can also provide information
about student behavior and academic progress to the mental health team.

School Nurses
School nurses provide support for students with medical and mental health needs. They also collaborate with other members of the mental
health team to ensure that students receive the appropriate care and support. 
Team conﬁgurations and practices can di er greatly between schools and districts based on the local contextual factors and the
resources that are available. For example, because of the added complexity of teaming for data-based decision-making at Tier 2, it
is recommended for teams to meet more often (e.g., biweekly; Bruhn et al., 2019). However, meeting more often also depends on
the administrator's support or the time available that the team members have.  
Further, depending on the school size, and levels of experience in implementing practices, schools may have separate teams for
each Tier of support (e.g., Tier 1 teams, Tier 2 teams, Tier 3 teams). Other schools may prefer to merge their resources into
integrated teams. 
Additionally, teams may be formed with a context focus. For example, instead of having an integrated teaming approach (e.g., a
Tier 2 team addressing both the behavioral and academic needs of students), some schools may prefer to have separate teams for
behavior and academic support. However, we recommend prioritizing a single MTSS team where all team members are based in one
school MTSS team. This uniﬁed team provides consistency, coordination, e ciency, and collaboration in the implementation of
interventions and support across all tiers.

To examine team member roles in more detail, review the graphic below
(adapted from PBIS). 
Graphic displaying roles and responsibilities of teams


Communication and Collaboration
Once you have your Tier 2 teams developed, communication and collaboration are a big part of making our systems sustainable. 
You might be thinking that you already communicate with your colleagues all the time. While you may talk and email frequently at
work, what is the quality of communication? Sending and receiving a lot of emails doesn’t necessarily indicate e ective
communication. 
To maximize the e ectiveness of communication, consider the following. 
Using an Agenda –
During in-person or virtual meetings, is there an agenda, and is it being adhered to? Following the agenda ensures that all students or
groups, as well as other concerns for that meeting, are discussed. It’s ok if conversations spark other ideas or questions, but it's
important to make note of those for another time. It is respectful of everyone’s time to stick to the agenda and stay mentally present
(focused on the task at hand at that meeting). E ciency can prevent feelings of frustration and reduce stress. 
Be Ef cient and Concise –
Be e cient and concise in email communication. Rather than relying on many emails, essential information could be sent once per
week in a newsletter format.
Include All Necessary Team Members in Meetings –
Remember to include all necessary team members in meetings, emails, and other communications. This could include, but is not
limited to, teachers, administrators, interventionists, school mental health sta , and family and community members. 
Because MTSS meetings can move quickly, some schools choose to have separate meetings with families to discuss progress and
concerns speciﬁc to their child. While it may seem like this is more time-intensive, this can actually be a more e cient strategy.
Families may not have an opportunity to express their concerns and priorities, or to feel heard if they only have a few minutes before
the MTSS team moves on to the next student. 
Think of this meeting with the family as a chance to build relationships, show transparency in our procedures and data, and work
together to develop e ective strategies and intervention plans. If a family member wants a quick update on their child’s progress,
this could be accomplished with a phone call from an MTSS team member.

Communicating About Data –
As with all decisions in the MTSS framework, choices and next steps should be based on data. Sometimes, data-based decisions may
be hard to explain verbally or through email. It can be hard to visualize and keep track of numbers through verbal explanations, and
families may have a hard time following jargon and the types of data that school sta  discuss regularly. An in-person or virtual
meeting where data, including graphs, are shared for the group to see is a powerful way to help everyone understand student
progress. 
If families wish, an MTSS team member can email copies of the graphs or send home paper copies. If your team is having trouble
developing e ective graphs or other visual representations of student progress, consider requesting professional development on
this topic from your administration. Your school or district may also have a technology specialist who is available as a resource! 
Include Families and Community Members –
Be sure to let families and community members know the best way to reach you! This can be done in a number of ways. Your school
could set up a dedicated email for MTSS inquiries, sta ed by a designated MTSS team member. Alternatively, there could be a point
person on the MTSS team for general questions. For parent questions about their child, you may ask parents to contact the MTSS
member overseeing their intervention (if using the case manager model).
As always, responding in a timely manner (about 1 business day) is encouraged. If the question is pretty involved, o er the family
member a phone call to discuss. If you need time to ﬁnd more information, communicate that to the family member and follow up
once you’ve gathered it.
As discussed in Core MTSS, be sure to let families know when their child is doing well! Brief, positive communications go a long way
in building rapport, encouraging families to communicate with us, and fostering a collaborative relationship. You will be working
with some families for years, especially those who remain in the area and have multiple children or extended family. Take this
opportunity to build positive working relationships that will last.

Challenges and Opportunities for Effective Teaming
While these are the ideal conditions for working on an MTSS team, there are many challenges that may present barriers to e ective
communication and collaboration. Speciﬁcally, some of the challenges, and opportunities for working through them are listed in
the diagram below (Weist, et al., 2012). 











Marginalization of Mental Health
One challenge to collaboration on teams is marginalization of mental health services. Many schools may prioritize the various other needs of
students, such as academic performance, and view mental health services as something additional that is not needed. 

Addressing Underrepresentation
To convince school leadership of the importance of mental health teaming, providing high-quality services is essential. When mental health
services are high-quality, improvements to student functioning and progress can help convince leadership of the necessity and impact of
these programs. 

Restricted Coordination Mechanisms
When working with students receiving services from multiple sources, it is important to coordinate these services so that everyone is on the
same page. For example, some students may be working with a school counselor and a psychiatrist in the community. It is important to keep
everyone involved informed and up-to-date.  
Some challenges to this process are restricted coordination mechanisms. There may not be many resources allocated to collaborating in this
way. Resources available in the school setting and in the community may be fragmented, making communication difficult. 

Building Effective Teams and Coordination Mechanisms
Establishing teams who can meet regularly to address student needs is important in promoting effective collaboration (Robertson et al.,
2004). As discussed earlier, teams do not only have to be school personnel but can also include non-school personnel. 
For example, teams may include school- and community-employed mental health staff, educators (general and special education), health
staff (e.g., school nurses), and family members. When everyone is included in these meetings, care can more effectively be coordinated. 

Limited Interdisciplinary Teamwork
Limited interdisciplinary teamwork can also be a challenge to collaboration. Team members bring different strengths to the table; some
might be trained in implementing evidence-based mental health practices, while others may have expertise in another area, like literacy.
With these differing roles and areas of expertise, communication can be challenging, and there may be conflicts between the differing
perspectives of diverse roles. 

Promoting Relationship Development
To improve interdisciplinary teamwork, building relationships (or enhancing relationships) is essential between educators, administrators,
school support staff, school-employed mental health staff, and community-employed professionals (Hunter, 2004). Building relationships
should involve a variety of communication methods such as individual meetings, group discussions, and interdisciplinary training. 
All teams should contact other teams to inform them about their training, skills, and interests (Acosta et al., 2002). This may sound familiar
from the Resource Mapping Lesson in the Core MTSS. Mapping available resources (both within the school and the community) is one way to
promote collaboration. 

Con dentiality Concerns
When providers from the school system and community systems interact, it can be challenging to protect student confidentiality and
collaborate. School staff are required to abide by FERPA, while community staff are required to abide by HIPAA. This can create challenges in
sharing information about students. 

Protecting Con dentiality
To address concerns about confidentiality, releases of information can be obtained. Providers can be proactive in seeking these releases of
information so that necessary information can be shared. 

Resource and Funding Issues
Limited funding and resources contribute to the challenges associated with collaboration.  When resources are limited, it is more challenging
to access basic needs (e.g., office space, computer access), assessment tools or measures, and other resources that are needed to promote
effective meetings. 

Promoting Policy Change
To address resource and funding issues, teams can form communities of practice that help promote high quality services and policy changes
that can increase the funding and availability of resources for school mental health. 
These recommendations may be familiar to you. Do you remember learning about the Interconnected Systems Framework
(ISF)? The goal of ISF is to enhance the mental health and academic performance of all students through a focus on school-
wide promotion and prevention, timely identi cation of issues, and effective interventions for social, emotional, behavioral,
and mental health concerns (Splett et al., 2017). It is also important to note that teaming is one of the core components of
ISF. 


Teams and Data-informed Decisions


Gathering and Reviewing Data
Now that we know more about who is on our teams and how they function, let's explore their role in making data-informed
decisions. Using the data system your MTSS team or district has agreed on, your team examines your schoolwide data. If your Tier 1
supports are working as expected, then at least 80% of your student population should be responding to this level of intervention.
This leaves 20% or fewer students in need of further intervention. Data is our key in determining which students need these
interventions, and, if so, which interventions are best suited to their needs.
All roads lead back to data. Data is a compass. It helps identify where you are, so you
can  gure out where to go next. MTSS teams are only as good as their data. Gather
and assess it carefully. 

Before we get started, review the following reminders about working with
data. 
-Data is not something to be feared or something only your admin and school psychologist can interpret. Data is
there to guide all of us so we can make the best decisions for our students and school population based on what we
know.
-We need schoolwide data to understand who is not responding to Tier 1:
>Look for patterns by setting, sta , and grade level. Where are there opportunities for more support?
>Take this opportunity to check your Tier 1 implementation. If the Tier 2 group is too big, take a look at your
Tier 1 interventions (especially ﬁdelity).
-Remember that tiers don’t have to operate in a linear fashion.
-What Tier 2 is not: a waiting room for Tier 3.


Gathering Data
Our ﬁrst step in data-informed decision making is to take stock of what data we already have and gather additional data as needed.
First, we have to determine what types of data are most needed. 

Click through the image to explore various types of data that we need. 



Existing Data
There is a wealth of student information at your fingertips. Think of office discipline referrals (ODRs), attendance, grades, and enrollment
history.  Speaking of enrollment history, it is an often neglected yet crucial piece of data! It's important to know if a student has attended
many schools and may have gaps in their learning and social skills deficits. This can happen even with students who switch schools frequently
within the same district. Ultimately, “The key to identification is having measures that paint an accurate picture of the student.” (Bruhn,
Lane, & Hirsch, 2014)

Teacher and Parent Input
Another critical part of data is teacher and parent/caregiver input. Teachers are typically (and should be) the main referral source. They are in
the unique position of seeing the student daily and are great reporters of behaviors and possible triggers. Parents may or may not see the
problem behavior at home. A difference in reports does not mean that any one reporter is “wrong;” rather, the demands of the school
environment (academic, social, or otherwise) may make the behaviors more apparent there rather than at home. Homes may be less
structured, with fewer behavioral demands, than at school. 

Review the tabs below for more information about data sources and
gathering useful data. 
WH AT   WE   A L R E A DY   H AV E
L O O K   AT   T H E   B A SE L I N E   DATA
UN I V E R SA L   SC R E E N E R S
O T H E R   PL A C E S  T O   L O O K
Start by looking at what you already have. It’s a huge time saver if someone pulls a student’s data before the MTSS team meeting (you
would be surprised at how long it takes to pull up all the data in the meeting!). For teams using the case manager model (where every
team member is assigned students to follow), team members can gather data for their subset of students prior to the meeting. 
WH AT   WE   A L R E A DY   H AV E
L O O K   AT   T H E   B A SE L I N E   DATA
UN I V E R SA L   SC R E E N E R S
O T H E R   PL A C E S  T O   L O O K
For further information on behavior, baseline data can be extremely helpful. Before implementing any other interventions, the
teacher can track the problem behavior for about ﬁve days. The team can decide how this looks—frequency, intensity, duration—
depending on the target behavior. However you choose to measure the behavior, make sure it’s quick and easy for the teacher, who is
already juggling so many tasks. 
Examples of data collection methods include: 
using an electronic calendar or phone reminders
keeping a tally sheet and clipboard handy 
using a checklist
transferring paperclips from one pocket to another every time the behavior occurs, 
using electronic forms
asking a classroom assistant (if available) to take data
WH AT   WE   A L R E A DY   H AV E
L O O K   AT   T H E   B A SE L I N E   DATA
UN I V E R SA L   SC R E E N E R S
O T H E R   PL A C E S  T O   L O O K
Universal screeners proactively identify students who are at-risk for social, emotional, and behavioral issues. We want to catch these
students before problems grow and get out of control. Universal screening data can also be used at the school and district levels to
look for patterns or larger issues that should be addressed. 
Remember, an elevated score on a screener is NOT the same thing as a mental health diagnosis. Having a diagnosis and needing
support and intervention don’t always go together!
For more information about screening, check out our "Core MTSS" course!
WH AT   WE   A L R E A DY   H AV E
L O O K   AT   T H E   B A SE L I N E   DATA
UN I V E R SA L   SC R E E N E R S
O T H E R   PL A C E S  T O   L O O K
Your school mental health sta  (psychologists, counselors, social workers, and nurses) can o er insight and ask questions to gather
relevant information that may not be found in our charts and graphs. You can also use parent and teacher checklists, or student self-
report (typically with parent permission—check your school and district’s policy or procedure for this). 
For example, you can ask teachers and families about any recent behavior changes, or any changes in the home/living situation that
may impact the student’s behavior. Divorce, moving homes, issues with friends at school, or trauma or loss of any kind may come up
in these conversations. There could be key pieces of information that those closest to the student can provide.
Don’t rely solely on your quantitative data. Qualitative data has its place here too! 


Reviewing Data
Now that you have your data gathered, the next step is to review it! Data review and analysis can take many forms. Some teams ﬁnd
it helpful to graph data and look for patterns over time. Some academic progress monitoring programs will do this for you. For data
that is not graphed for you, your MTSS team might consider designating one member to put other data in a spreadsheet and create
graphs for the team to review. On some teams, this might be the team's case manager. On other teams, it may be someone else. 
At Tier 2, data is examined for small groups and individual students. Once you have your students placed in small groups, each
group leader can track and graph the data. There may be an overwhelming amount of data to track and organize, so you may be
wondering how to manage this data. 

Breakdown by Concern
One way to organize and analyze your data is by focusing on concerns that students may be encountering. Using this method can
save time later as your team plans small group support, as you will already have students grouped by the target skill. Some concerns
might include: 
-Attendance 
-Work completion
-Internalizing behavior (anxiety, depression) 
-Externalizing behavior (physical aggression towards people, physical aggression towards property, verbal
aggression/threats, leaving assigned area)
-Problems with focus or on-task behavior
-Difficulty having positive interactions with peers and/or adults
-Trouble making and keeping friends

Breakdown by Frequency/Severity of Problem Behaviors
Data can also be organized around behavior. However, be mindful that this may not be an e cient grouping in the long run. 
-ODRs
-Suspensions
-Recommendations for expulsion
Be careful with ODRs. Criticisms of using this data alone include variability in how many ODRs teachers and staff write
and that this is a “wait to fail” method. In addition, ODRs usually don’t pick up students with internalizing problems (Lane et
al., 2012).


Barriers to Data-informed Decision Making
Bridge over falling water
Understanding and using data to guide interventions is hard! This is a skill that takes a while to develop. However, working
through school and individual student data with your MTSS team helps strengthen your skills, as well as your conﬁdence. 

Let’s take a closer look at some speci c factors that can hinder the effective
use of data and how to work through them. 
Training –
Maybe your grad school or other professional training program didn’t include much data-informed decision making. That’s ok!
There are resources you can access now to ﬁll in any gaps.
First, look around your building or district. Who are the data experts people typically seek out for support? This could include your
administrators, school psychologists, school counselors, or lead interventionists. Your colleagues can assist you with speciﬁc
questions or concerns.
Also think about professional development opportunities o ered by your district or other state and national professional
organizations, like the Palmetto State Teachers Association, American School Counselor Association (ASCA), or National Association
of School Psychologists (NASP). Look for o erings dedicated to collecting and using data. In addition, you may consider taking
courses through any of the universities in our state. Always check for recertiﬁcation credits! 
You might also consider asking your school administration to include information on this topic during regularly scheduled faculty
meetings. Similarly, consider reaching out to district leadership to include sessions on data-informed decision-making in district in-
services. If you’re looking for more information, your colleagues probably have similar questions too! 
Limited Resources –
We all know how limited our resources can be in schools! People and materials are both in short supply. This certainly makes data
gathering and analysis more challenging, but not impossible.
In looking at who and what is available, don’t be afraid to get creative. Are there any support sta  or classroom assistants who can be
taught how to gather data? What materials are needed? If you choose to take data on paper forms, can your administration add extra
funds to your copy card to accommodate this? Also, think about working with your grade-level or subject-area team to pool
resources and streamline your data-gathering process.
Time –
Time is arguably our most limited resource. It can be di cult to ﬁnd time to progress monitor, let alone organize and examine the
data! As we discussed in Core MTSS, scheduling and planning are your friends!
Every semester or quarter (whatever makes the most sense for you and your role), go through your weekly and monthly
commitments and include everything on a master calendar. No matter how small the task may seem, be sure to include it! You can
choose to do this electronically or with paper and pencil. Once you have everything mapped out, you can decide how to include time
for progress monitoring and data review. Some people dedicate a day or half a day to all their data collection, while others choose to
block smaller chunks of time throughout the week. This is up to you based on your schedule and other commitments. 
If you’re having trouble ﬁnding time in your schedule for this, you might reach out to your team or other colleagues in your school
for ideas or help. You can also approach your administration about having dedicated progress monitoring time. 
Check District Resources –
Your district may have resources to help with data collection and analysis. For example, there are a variety of fee-based student data
aggregator programs available. Some districts choose these programs to streamline the process. These programs allow schools and
districts to quickly sort and examine data at the district, school, small group, and individual student levels.  For example, you might
be interested in attendance data for a particular grade level at your school. Such programs would allow you to search for this
information quickly and e ciently. In addition, some districts use electronic progress monitoring measures for academic and
behavior concerns. These technology tools can make things easier.
MTSS Meetings –
In addition to setting aside time for progress monitoring, having dedicated time for MTSS meetings and data review is a powerful
way to make sure students in need of Tier 2 support are being reached. Based on the needs of your school or district, your MTSS team
can decide on a meeting schedule. For some schools with a high level of student needs, meeting weekly may be appropriate. Some
schools may choose to meet every other week, or once a month. This is truly dependent on what works for your school and your
team.
Buy-in –
Lastly, buy-in from the administration about the importance of collecting and using data is a key piece in the sustainability of this
system. As you’ve likely experienced, school culture and priorities are greatly inﬂuenced by your school leadership, speciﬁcally your
administrators. Their priorities set the tone and impact where sta  put their time and energy. If data-informed decision-making is
important to administrators, this eventually becomes a part of the school culture and norms. 
In meetings with teachers and parents, asking for data on student performance would not be out of place. In fact, it would be an
expectation. Including data collection and analysis as a part of your school and district’s culture is something that develops over time
and reﬂects the priorities of leadership.


Selecting & Implementing Tier 2 Interventions


Best Practices in Implementation of Interventions


Intervention Selection
Teams evaluate students’ strengths and needs and decide which method would be the best for delivering Tier 2 interventions,
considering school resources, student personality and preferences, and all the other data sources mentioned earlier. At the Tier 2
level, there are several options for interventions. Let's review some of them with the ﬂashcards below. 

Flip each card to learn more about each Tier 2 delivery method!
1 of 3
Students with speci c behavior needs may
need adjustments to usual classroom
procedures. General education teachers can
implement different supports in the
Small group instruction is a targeted
classroom and track the students’ progress.
intervention where a team member works
These interventions can be relatively simple,
with a small group of students who have
like changing the student’s seat or providing
similar learning needs or challenges. Group
opportunities for movement, like pedals
interventions may be particularly effective for
under desks, wobble stools, or exercise bands
addressing social and emotional skills, such as
around chair legs. Some interventions may be
building resilience or coping with stress. This
more intensive, like Check In/Check
delivery method is effective when the
Out(CICO) or more speci c social skill
students have similar skill gaps or need to
support. Remember, there is a range of
practice a speci c skill. It also allows for more
behaviors and interventions at Tier 2!
student interaction and peer-to-peer support.
The group size can vary depending on the
needs of the students but typically ranges
from three to six students, with no more than
With co-teaching, two team members work
together to provide instruction to a group of
students. This con guration is particularly
effective when students have diverse learning
needs or when there is a need for
differentiated instruction. It also provides an
opportunity for the team to model
collaboration and teamwork for students.
2 of 3
3 of 3
As you can tell, there are a variety of methods behind how Tier 2 interventions can be delivered. How do you decide which one is
best? Examining the beneﬁts and challenges of Tier 2 delivery methods can help you make that decision. 

Click through the images below to explore the bene ts and challenges for
different Tier 2 delivery methods. Click images to enlarge.
3 graphics illustrating beneﬁts and challenges of di erent intervention delivery methods 
3 graphics illustrating beneﬁts and challenges of di erent intervention delivery methods
3 graphics illustrating beneﬁts and challenges of di erent intervention delivery methods

Considerations for Matching Needs with Interventions
With all of the options available, there are many considerations to think about. Review the list below for some of the important
considerations that may come up while matching student needs to interventions. 
-Consider any data regarding underlying triggers or causes of behavior problems to tailor your interventions.
-When grouping students together, consider personalities. Some students may be more successful working away
from particular peers. Although it is important for students to learn to get along with others, we are focused on
skill building in Tier 2. 
-Plan how often you will progress monitor and review that data as an MTSS team.
-Also, consider how and when you will incorporate ﬁdelity checks. (Planning is your friend!) Fidelity at or greater
than 80% is considered adequate implementation (Bruhn, Lane, & Hirsch, 2014). For interventions with less than
80% ﬁdelity, examine the checklist further to determine which areas need support.
When we at the SBHA say “grouping” students, we do not mean labeling them. It is simply using categories for interventions
and needs to smooth the intervention implementation process! 


Intervention Implementation & Progress Monitoring

Fidelity of Implementation
Now that interventions have been selected, it is time to implement them! At this stage of the process, it is important to consider
ﬁdelity. Fidelity of implementation is crucial for Tier 2 interventions. It helps ensure that the intervention is being delivered as
intended and that interventionists are consistently applying the intervention with the necessary quality and intensity. 
Here are some of the best strategies to help you ensure ﬁdelity of implementation.
Providing interventionists with scripted
lessons can help ensure that the interventions
are delivered consistently and with  delity.
Scripted lessons provide step-by-step
instructions and can help interventionists stay
on track and make sure they cover all of the
necessary content. Scripted lessons can also
serve as a training tool for new
interventionists.
1 of 6
Ongoing coaching and feedback can help
interventionists improve their skills and
ensure that interventions are being
implemented with  delity. Coaching can help
2 of 6
to identify areas where interventionists may
be struggling, and coaches can observe
interventionists in action, provide feedback,
and offer guidance on how to improve their
Regular  delity checks can help ensure that
practice.
interventions are being implemented as
intended. These checks can be done through
observations, lesson plan reviews,
intervention data reviews, or  delity
checklists. Fidelity checks can help identify
areas where interventionists may need
additional support or training.
Providing ongoing professional development
opportunities can help interventionists stay
up to date on best practices and new
research. Training can be provided through
workshops, webinars, or professional
development as all methods help
interventionists develop new skills and
strategies for working with students. Support
can be provided through coaching, mentoring,
or peer-to-peer support.
3 of 6
4 of 6
5 of 6
Using data to inform implementation can help to
ensure that interventionists are targeting the right
areas of need and that interventions are effective.
Creating a supportive environment where
Data can be used to monitor progress, adjust
interventionists feel valued and supported
implementation as needed, and evaluate the
can help ensure that they are motivated to
effectiveness of the intervention.
implement interventions with  delity. This can
be done through team-building activities,
regular check-ins, and providing
opportunities for professional growth and
advancement.

Progress Monitoring
6 of 6
Another key component of implementing interventions is progress monitoring. After you’ve implemented your interventions for a
su cient amount of time (there are no hard and fast rules here, but rather what your team has agreed is appropriate), your MTSS
team reviews student progress monitoring data and makes decisions. Review the tabs below for some decisions that may be made
at various stages of student progress. 
C O N T I N UE   I N T E R V E N T I O N
E X I T/ FA DE
C O N T I N UE   SUPPO R T   WI T H
C O N SI DE R   A DDI T I O N A L
A DJUST ME N T
SUPPO R T
If students are showing growth but still working towards skill mastery (typically considered 80%), keep doing what you’re doing! 
C O N T I N UE   I N T E R V E N T I O N
E X I T/ FA DE
C O N T I N UE   SUPPO R T   WI T H
C O N SI DE R   A DDI T I O N A L
A DJUST ME N T
SUPPO R T
If students have made progress and are showing mastery of the skill, consider moving to Tier 1 if there are no other signiﬁcant
concerns (ODRs, teacher, or parent concerns). If the student has other skill deﬁcits requiring Tier 2 support, consider a di erent
intervention to work on that. 
C O N T I N UE   I N T E R V E N T I O N
E X I T/ FA DE
C O N T I N UE   SUPPO R T   WI T H
C O N SI DE R   A DDI T I O N A L
A DJUST ME N T
SUPPO R T
If the student is not making adequate progress in the current intervention, consider adjusting the intensity (more frequent sessions,
longer sessions) and duration of the current intervention.
Alternatively, consider the appropriateness of the selected intervention. Has new information emerged, suggesting that another
intervention may be a better ﬁt?
Don’t be afraid to change course.
C O N T I N UE   I N T E R V E N T I O N
E X I T/ FA DE
C O N T I N UE   SUPPO R T   WI T H
C O N SI DE R   A DDI T I O N A L
A DJUST ME N T
SUPPO R T
For some students, Tier 2 support is not enough. These students may require Tier 3 interventions. If a Tier 2 intervention is not
immediately successful, this does NOT necessarily mean that the student needs Tier 3 support. Unless there is a pressing need or a
crisis situation, make certain that you are truly giving Tier 2 supports a chance before moving to Tier 3. 
What does it look like to give Tier 2 time to work? 
Be sure your progress monitoring data is accurate and captures the information you are seeking.  
Give adequate time for your Tier 2 intervention. Behavior change is often slow and incremental. This makes it harder to see
progress, but it doesn’t mean the intervention isn’t working.
However, if all of these steps have been taken, requesting assistance at the Tier 3 level may be needed. As always, use data as a
compass in making this decision. 
Overall, progress monitoring is a key phase of interventions and ensures that students are receiving support that is best matched
to their needs, implemented with ﬁdelity, and improves outcomes. Data is a compass for deciding when to continue with
interventions, modify them, consider alternate interventions, or increase the level of support.   


Applying Data-Informed Decision Making: Case Studies
In this lesson, we've now reviewed all phases of the data-informed decision making process on MTSS teams! With all of this in
mind, let's take a look at how this might play out in the school setting. Review the example case studies below. 

Academic Data—Jamal's Story
A teacher reports that Jamal, a 2nd grade student, has di culties with reading ﬂuency.
Part 1
The results of a reading screener indicate the potential need for support for Jamal. Further academic measures show
that Jamal performs well with letter and sight word identiﬁcation, but is having a hard time with using decoding
strategies for unfamiliar words. 
Part 2
The team reviews reading interventions and decides to use the Fundations reading curriculum to build this skill.
Fundations is already being implemented in the school, and Jamal gets along well with the other students currently
receiving this small group intervention. Because Jamal has other foundational reading skills, the team agrees to start
with 30 minutes of Tier 2 small group reading intervention per day for 3 days per week.
Progress monitoring data will be collected every 2 weeks. The team agrees to review his  progress after 8 weeks.
Part 3
After 8 weeks, Jamal's progress is reviewed. The leader of the small group intervention has nothing but positive
things to say about Jamal's progress and participation in the group: he actively participates, gets along well with
others, and has signiﬁcantly improved his reading ﬂuency. Given this success, the team decides to fade out the
Fundations intervention. For the next 8 weeks, Jamal will attend the intervention for 30 minutes once a week, and
then progress will be reviewed again to determine any additional next steps as needed. 
Summary
In this example, the Tier 2 team used multiple sources of data to make decisions about what will most help Jamal.
This is a key part of matching supports to student needs! The team also saw that Jamal was making signiﬁcant
progress and decided to slowly phase out support. 

Behavior Data—Joseph's Story
A teacher reports that one of her 4th grade students is having di culties with work completion.
Part 1
Joseph starts his in-class assignments, but rarely ﬁnishes them in class or when sent home as homework. 
The team decides to gather the following data: percentage of completed assignments (pulled from PowerSchool),
parent concerns (brief phone interview), and brief in-person student interviews.
Part 2
After gathering the assignment data, the team looks more closely at Joseph’s assignment record to search for any
patterns. 
Overall, Joseph turns in 60% of his assignments. However, he only turns in 30% of his afternoon assignments.
Afternoon subjects include ELA and social studies. 
No academic problems were indicated by his standardized assessments, academic screeners, or grades on completed
assignments. Therefore, the team does not believe there is an academic skill deﬁcit. 
Part 3
According to Joseph’s father and grandmother (his primary caregivers), he tends to be more distractible and has
di culty with focus in the afternoons versus the mornings. They also ﬁnd that breaking up instructions into smaller
chunks helps Joseph stay on task with chores at home.
When interviewed at school, Joseph reported that ELA and social studies are “boring,” and math is his preferred
subject. He tries to ﬁnish his work but winds up doodling or talking with his friends.
Part 4
Based on this data, the team agrees to implement a Tier 2 work completion intervention in the classroom. His teacher
breaks instructions down into smaller chunks for him, increases support during ELA and social studies, and reviews
his missing assignments with him each week to help him catch up.
The team agrees to monitor Joseph’s work completion and reconvene after 8 weeks to review his progress and discuss
next steps.
Part 5
After 8 weeks, the team reviews Joseph's data. After the intervention, Joseph has increased his afternoon work
completion from 30% to 50%, and overall work completion to 70%. The team is thrilled with this progress, but
decides to continue support until Joseph reaches an overall work completion rate of 80%. They will review data
biweekly to determine when this goal is met and when to start fading (or increasing) support. 
Summary
In this example, data was used to help support Joseph with task completion during class. Data sources came from the
classroom, and crucial information came from caregivers and from Joseph. When matching supports, it is important
to give voice and choice. 
As you can see with Jamal and Joseph, data is important for both academic and behavioral decisions regarding students. These are
just examples, and you can most likely think of examples from your own educational career! Now it is time for one last knowledge
check before the lesson summary. 
Great work!
Let's review the lesson. 
-Data is at the core of everything in the MTSS framework. Tier 2 is no exception! By
repeatedly going back to student data, teams can be conﬁdent that decisions are made
based on what is truly in front of us, rather than an idea or a feeling.  
-Collecting and reviewing data regularly allows teams to look for patterns and trends, and act accordingly to
support students and families. In Tier 2, this helps teams make decisions about which students can beneﬁt from
interventions. 
-There are many options for delivering interventions at the Tier 2 level. Some of these options include general
education classroom support, small group instruction, and co-teaching/co-teaming. Each of these options have
unique strengths and weaknesses, so it's important to do what works best for each individual situation. 
-During interventions, progress monitoring of student data helps the MTSS team decide whether to continue or
adjust interventions, return to Tier 1 support, or move to Tier 3 support. 
Checking intervention ﬁdelity is another important way to use data to make decisions. No matter how long MTSS
and various interventions have been operational at your site, it is still necessary to regularly check to ensure that
interventions are being implemented as they were designed.
-Over time, as collecting data and reviewing it regularly becomes a part of the standard operating procedures in
your school and district, your site will develop a culture of data-driven decision-making. Asking teachers for data
or pulling up graphs of student progress on a large screen in meetings will not be unusual but rather expected.
Families will also learn to become consumers of data to appraise their child’s progress. 
Mentoring-Based Programs




@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 3 of 5
Mentoring-Based Programs


Outcomes:
1. Critically examine various mentoring programs and their role in Tier 2 of the Multi-Tiered System of Supports
2. Describe the process of implementing mentoring programs
3. Examine strategies for building mentoring relationships (e.g., Motivational Interviewing, Mentoring FAN)
4. Apply the principles of mentoring to Check In, Check Out as a key example


Holding Hands Across the Bridge


Mentoring Programs in Tier 2
You’ve most likely seen a movie or show where a protagonist came across a bridge that they just had to cross. Even if the bridge
was rickety or the protagonist was afraid of heights, there was no getting to the destination without going through the bridge.
What pushes the protagonist to take that ﬁrst step, and then each step after, across that bridge? More often than not, it’s walking
with a companion. 
While Tier 2 is certainly not a rickety bridge, it can still be di cult to cross unknown territory for students and school sta  faculty
alike! This is where mentoring programs come in. In this section, you’ll review what mentoring is, including examples of
mentoring types and stories, its beneﬁts, and what inﬂuences mentoring’s e ectiveness! 


What is Mentoring?
Adult working with child 
Mentoring is a valuable experience for anyone to have throughout their life. Mentors help support your goals, provide a shoulder to
cry on, and help you to learn and grow. Thinking back to your own experiences, what are some of the mentoring experiences that
you have had? Consider a particularly helpful mentor (personally, professionally, or academically). What about this mentoring
relationship was particularly helpful? Which of these qualities do you want to bring to your own mentoring relationships?
While mentoring is a great support for any student, Tier 2 mentoring-based programming o ers personalized and targeted
support to address students' academic and behavioral needs. It provides mentoring to students needing individualized assistance
beyond general classroom instruction. These programs entail one-on-one or small group mentoring sessions targeting academic,
social, and behavioral challenges that may hinder a student’s progress in the classroom.

School-Based Mentoring
Mentoring is used widely in the school setting: two-and-a-half million students participate in mentoring programs each year
(Raposa, et al., 2017)! There are many di erent programs that can be used to provide mentoring. Some mentoring may be through
formal programs and follow formal guidelines and requirements, while other mentoring relationships may be less formal and
occur organically. Later in this lesson, you’ll learn more about a popular program for mentoring known as Check In, Check Out
(CICO). 
Mentoring relationships can be between di erent members of the school community. 
School books and pencils
Click through the tabs to learn more! 
E DUC AT O R S  &   ST UDE N T S
E DUC AT O R S  &   E DUC AT O R S
ST UDE N T   &   ST UDE N T
C O MMUN I T Y   ME MB E R S  &
ST UDE N T S
This may be what ﬁrst comes to mind when thinking about school-based mentoring: a non-parental adult working with a student.
This could be a teacher, school counselor, social worker, or other trusted adult.  Check out this example, Elite Ladies, from Fairﬁeld
County School District!
Click Here
E DUC AT O R S  &   ST UDE N T S
E DUC AT O R S  &   E DUC AT O R S
ST UDE N T   &   ST UDE N T
C O MMUN I T Y   ME MB E R S  &
ST UDE N T S
Mentoring is for everyone, not just students. Educators can also beneﬁt from the support and guidance of other educators. In South
Carolina, an Induction and Mentoring program pairs new educators with more experienced educators to help increase teacher
e ectiveness. You can learn more about it at the following link!
Click Here
E DUC AT O R S  &   ST UDE N T S
E DUC AT O R S  &   E DUC AT O R S
ST UDE N T   &   ST UDE N T
C O MMUN I T Y   ME MB E R S  &
ST UDE N T S
Peer mentoring programs involve students mentoring other students. This may be cross-age mentoring, with older students
mentoring younger students. These programs are e ective at improving academic and behavioral outcomes for both mentor and
mentee. To see a local example from right here in South Carolina, you can click the links to learn about peer mentoring in Horry
County!
Click Here
E DUC AT O R S  &   ST UDE N T S
E DUC AT O R S  &   E DUC AT O R S
ST UDE N T   &   ST UDE N T
C O MMUN I T Y   ME MB E R S  &
ST UDE N T S
Some mentoring programs involve community volunteers building relationships with students. In South Carolina, there are many
community mentoring programs. For some examples, check out the links below! Here are two examples, one from Orangeburg
County and the other from Richland One!
Click Here for Orangeburg County
Click Here for Richland One


Beneﬁts of Mentoring
Mentoring happens in many di erent contexts and with di erent members of the community and can have life-long beneﬁts!
There are many di erent ways in which mentoring can be impactful. Some of the areas of impact for mentoring include:   
-
improved academic attitudes and behavior (Chan, et al., 2013)
-improved and reduced risk for mental health symptoms, such as anxiety or depression (King, et al., 2002; Cavell et
al.,2021)
-improved attendance and graduation rates (Chan et al., 2013; Clark et al., 2016)
-reduced problem behaviors and o ce discipline referrals, suspensions, and expulsions (Caldarella et al., 2009;
Gordon et al., 2013; Zotto, 2017)
-improved social and emotional outcomes (Karcher, 2008; King et al., 2002)
These beneﬁts of mentoring can be used to set goals in the school setting. Once a mentor knows what mentoring is capable of,
they can use these outcomes to set goals with their mentees! While di erent programs may focus on di erent mentoring
outcomes (e.g., attendance, positive shifts in behavior), you can be conﬁdent that mentoring has the capacity to help students
achieve those goals! 
Click through the image below for examples of student goals that mentors
can help support!









Complete all homework assignments this week
Make a B or higher on next week's math test
Read for 30 minutes outside of school every day

Raise my hand when I have something to say
Walk quietly in line when the class goes to lunch every day this week

Use positive affirmations about myself three times per day
Stop myself when I start to say something self-deprecating 

Tell my teacher or another adult where I am going when I need to leave the classroom
Think about the pros and cons before making a decision

Ask my parents how they are doing after school each day this week
Imagine the perspectives of my friends when I disagree with them

Ask for help when I start to feel stressed
Take a deep breath when I start to feel angry

Ask my friends if they need any help with their homework
Say hello to my neighbors when I see them

Attend class every day this week
Attend 90% of school days this month
Come to school on-time 90% of days this month
The value of mentoring is made clearer, and even more real, when the stories behind it are revealed. Click the link below to read
stories of how mentoring can change lives and watch the video featuring one of the mentee and mentors you’ll learn about! While
watching the videos and reading the stories, consider the following questions: 
Adult working with student
What seemed to go well in these mentoring relationships?
Is there anything that stands out to you as something you might apply in your own relationships
with students?

Mentoring Stories - MENTOR
As a young inner-city child in a single-parent household, Joe was one of many young people facing an
opportunity gap - as he describes it, "the odds were stacked against me." Robin became Joe's mentor
when he was just 8 years old, and they both saw immediate changes, notably in the improvement of
Joe's grades.
READ MORE MENTOR 
The Mentoring Effect - Joe and Robin's Story
MENTOR
03:55
You’ve read about it in the research and you just heard it from Joe and Robin: mentoring can be a catalyst for great change in
schools! Let’s look now at factors that inﬂuence mentoring’s impact. 


Inﬂuences on Mentoring
Many factors inﬂuence the e ectiveness and success of mentoring programs. Explore the distinct aspects of mentoring that
contribute to its e ectiveness and the positive outcomes you learned about earlier!

Flip through the  ashcards below! 
When matching mentors and mentees,  t is
important to consider. Does the mento have
an area of expertise especially relevant to the
goals of the mentoring relationship? Do the
mentor and mentee have anything in
common? Is there mutual respect? These
factors are essential in developing a strong
relationship. 
1 of 4
Attunement is generally the ability to sense
and respond to the needs and emotions of
others. This awareness and alignment
between mentors and mentees is important in
building trust and connection. Mentors who
seem unaware or disconnected from the
needs of mentees may be harder to trust and
open up to. Attunement can be challenging;
clear and open communication is an important
tool for staying as attuned as possible and
avoiding misunderstandings.
Environmental stress can create challenges in
mentoring relationships (Poon et al., 2022).
Some stressors for mentees include family
stress (e.g., sibling con ict, caregivers
divorcing or separating, caregiver in the
military), economic stress (e.g., poverty,
housing insecurity, parent job instability), and
mental health challenges (e.g., depression,
anxiety disorder). These stressors were
associated with an increased likelihood of
ending mentoring programs early (Grossman,
et al., 2012). At the same time, students
experiencing these stressors are also more
likely to gain the most from successful
Cultural responsiveness is key to all aspects
of MTSS, including mentoring relationships.
Cultural responsiveness involves the
awareness of cultural differences, acceptance
of people from all backgrounds, and an
orientation of continuously learning about
diverse cultures. This is essential in mentoring
relationships to ensure that mentors and
mentees have mutual respect, and that equity
is supported.
2 of 4
3 of 4
4 of 4
Crossing Tier 2 may feel scary but when you have a mentor to cross that bridge with you, you’ll be halfway across the bridge before
you even know it. You’ve gained a better understanding of what mentoring programs are, their beneﬁts, and speciﬁc examples of
goals mentors can help mentees set. After a knowledge check, you’ll be learning how to implement mentoring programs! 


How to Implement Mentoring Programs


Practically Taking Steps Across the Bridge
Given the many factors impacting mentoring, it’s important to create a clear plan for supporting a positive and e ective mentoring
program. Implementing mentoring programs is a complex process for schools and districts to undergo, but don’t worry! We’re
here to help. Let’s take a look at each step of the process now!


Step 1: Select Programs
The ﬁrst step of implementing mentoring programs is to plan which programs will be used and what materials will be needed for
implementation. There are many mentoring programs available, or mentoring can also occur informally.

See a chart of  mentoring programs below! Click the image to enlarge.
Table reviewing various mentoring programs
In addition to the programs listed here, there are many mentoring programs to choose from. With all of these options, it is
important to target the mentoring programs that match the needs of the school and students. The program chosen will depend on
multiple factors, including:    
-age of students (elementary, middle, or high school)
-available resources and cost of program
-available sta  or volunteers
-goal of mentoring: academic, social, emotional, mental health, attendance, behavior
-evidence base for program e ectiveness
It is important to choose high-quality programs that will best meet the particular needs for your speciﬁc school and student
population. Data, as always, is a valuable resource in determining programs that will be the best ﬁt for your school!  


Step 2: Prepare to Launch
There are many considerations to address when preparing for a mentoring program. Before launching a chosen program, it is
essential to organize and put people and systems in place to support it. Some of the systems to establish early include:
-advisory committee–group of individuals collaborating to support implementation of programs
-conduct needs assessment–examine the needs and strengths of the school community to determine which
programs are a good ﬁt
-budgeting–determine which resources are available and identify sources of income, such as fundraising
-marketing–develop a plan for promoting mentoring programs to increase and retain engagement
-staffng–determining who will serve which functions of implementing the program
-evaluation and data-informed decision making procedures–determining methods of storing and collecting data
to monitor progress, track ﬁdelity, and gauge e ectiveness


Step 3: Recruit, Screen, and Train Mentors and Mentees

Mentor Selection
It is also important to have a structure in place for determining who is involved in the program as mentors and mentees. This stage
includes screening. Screening is important before matching mentors and mentees for safety and suitability. 

Review the cards below to examine safety and suitability concerns.  
Prevent individuals who could pose a safety risk
from interacting with children by, for example,
conducting criminal background checks).
Determine  t of mentor for programs: consider
expertise of adults compared to the needs of and
focus of program, the commitment level,
dependability, and availability of adults, and the
ability of the adult to build a respectful rapport
with students. 

Mentor Training
Once suitable mentors have been identiﬁed, they are provided with in-depth   training. Training will vary depending on the
program: some programs may have speciﬁc manuals or training requirements, so it is important to consider these in the planning
phase. Regardless of the speciﬁc program, here are some key topics to consider in training mentors.  
-Appropriateness: activities, physical contact, conversation, and social media 
-Structure: meeting schedules, implementation procedures, data collection if applicable
-Safety: mandatory reporting (i.e., child abuse, suicidality, or homicidality), conﬁdentiality, emergency and crisis
procedures, and health information
-Logistics: transportation, scheduling, and money spent on activities
-Relationship-building: respect, trust, and empathy
It is also important to let mentors know the expectations of time commitments for the mentoring program. An essential step is to
let mentors know how many hours per week, month, and year are required during the duration of the program. Some programs
specify multi-year commitments, and it is extremely important to have mentors that are aware of and dedicated to following
through on this commitment. Early termination of mentors can be harmful to students’ attachment needs: the need for safe,
secure, relationships. Early termination can lead to feelings of abandonment and harm a students’ ability to form secure
attachments in future relationships.   
While screening occurs before training, red  ags in behavior and interactions during training can also be grounds for
screening out mentors! Student safety is paramount. 

Mentee Selection
Selecting mentees involves screening as well. It is important to determine which students would beneﬁt most from the speciﬁc
mentoring program being implemented. For example, a program may focus speciﬁcally on increasing attendance. School data can
be used to determine students with a certain number of absences during a speciﬁc time. Then, these students can be included in
the mentee group. Students may also be matched to more intensive interventions if necessary; for example, if a mentoring
program focuses on behavior, some students meeting criteria for being involved in the mentoring program may need a more
intensive support, such as a Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA) or Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP). School data and program
requirements can help make these decisions.  
After students are identiﬁed as being a good match for the program, it is also key to obtain consent for participation from families
and to provide them with information. Family involvement is an important component of mentorship, and it starts before
beginning the program! Before assigning a mentee to a mentor, participation consent forms are sent to families. Importantly,
families always have the option to deny participation.  


Step 4: Match Mentors and Mentees
After training, matching can begin! Review the clickthrough below for important considerations for matching mentors and
mentees. 








Cultural and Linguistic Background

Personality

Availability

Shared Interests

Preferences

Program Goals

Mentor Experience
All of these factors can impact the mentoring relationship. It is important to have enough information about mentors and mentees
before making a match. Considering personal preferences, it may be helpful to generate a survey to get feedback from mentors and
mentees about their preferences. This can help ensure the strongest match.


Step 5: Implement Interventions
An adult working with student
Once mentors and mentees are assigned, it is time to start implementation! This is the phase of the process where interventions
occur, and mentors meet with their mentees. Implementation will likely look di erent for the various mentoring programs that are
available and may focus on the di erent goals mentioned earlier in the lesson. Some programs may follow exact guidelines from
manuals or training modules, while other programs may be more ﬂexible.  
Mentors and mentees will also meet at di erent frequencies and di erent lengths of time for di erent programs. Some mentoring
programs may have once-weekly meetings for a year or longer. Other interventions, such as CICO which you’ll learn more about
later are typically shorter (e.g., several weeks) but involve more frequent meetings (e.g., twice per day). Since there is such a wide
range in time frames, consulting guidebooks and manuals will help you determine the appropriate length of time for each
mentoring relationship.  
Data and progress monitoring can also help you determine the right length of time for mentoring and is an important component
of program implementation. For some programs, goals will be deﬁned from the start, and a set amount of time will be agreed on.
For other programs, the amount of time spent in mentoring might be based on reaching a speciﬁc goal. Monitoring data can help
determine if goals are met, if more time is needed in the mentoring program, or if a di erent program may better suit the mentee’s
needs.  
 Another important component of monitoring the mentoring program is tracking ﬁdelity, or how closely the intervention is being
administered as intended. Many mentoring programs will have manuals or guides that can help measure ﬁdelity of
implementation. Mentee feedback is also important: having check-ins with mentees about how the mentoring is going can also
help provide the best experience possible and tailor the intervention to individual needs. 


Step 6: Fade Out/Closure
The mentoring relationship cycle involves closure or ending the relationship. This stage is important to plan and carry out
carefully: it is important to not end too soon or abruptly, as this can lead to feelings of abandonment or mistrust that can harm
mentees. Clear, positive communication helps to facilitate smooth closures that result in comfort for both mentor and mentee.
Fading is also a strategy of gradually reducing sessions overtime to naturally bring about the end of a program while minimizing
the risk of harming the mentee. The exact strategy used for closure will depend on the youth being mentored and the program
being used, so planning ahead for this phase is important.  
You probably noticed that while there is an overall timeline for the implementation of mentoring programs, it depends heavily on
the type of program. In the very next section, you will be learning more about individual programs!


Mentoring Strategies


Approaching the Bridge
Whether you are mentoring students one-on-one, have a small group of student mentees, or just want to improve your
relationships with students outside of mentoring relationships, there are many strategies that can help you e ectively engage with
students! In this section, you will learn about the importance of growth mindsets, Motivational Interviewing, OARS, and more! 


Growth Mindset
Plants growing
A growth mindset emphasizes the ability of the mind to grow. This means that the focus is on how abilities can change over time.
People with a growth mindset believe in their ability to improve and are more likely to seek out new challenges, believing in their
ability to overcome them. A growth mindset can also help people remain more open to constructive criticism; when abilities can be
improved, constructive feedback is a tool to help you get there. 
In contrast to a growth mindset, a ﬁxed mindset emphasizes innate abilities and unchangeable traits. People with a ﬁxed mindset
believe that you either have an ability or you don’t, and there isn’t much that can be done about it. With a ﬁxed mindset, challenges
are less likely to be sought out and criticism is more likely to be taken personally. In a ﬁxed mindset, failures or setbacks are more
likely to be taken personally and viewed as ﬁxed traits. 
Locks on a door

For examples of the difference between  xed and growth mindset, review the
examples below! Click the graphic to enlarge.
Graphic comparing ﬁxed and growth mindsets
You can see why we started this section with growth mindsets! If mentors do not believe that their mentee can grow
and change, the relationship is likely to be tense and ineffective.
Most people have a combination of both ﬁxed and growth mindsets: it is extremely di cult to entirely adopt either one (Dweck,
2016). However, emphasizing use of a growth mindset instead of a ﬁxed mindset has many beneﬁts (Yeager & Dweck, 2021).
 Some of these beneﬁts are listed below.
increased grades and test scores
increased conﬁdence
more resilience
higher motivation

For more information about growth mindset, review the TED talk below
featuring Carol Dweck, the founder of the growth mindset theory.  
Sorry: we can't play video on this browser. Please make sure it's up to date and that Flash 11.1 or higher is
installed. Load this talk on ted.com
As Carol Dweck discusses, a growth mindset allows people to have a “not yet” approach to their struggles for success. This is not
only important for students: the beneﬁts of having a growth mindset are also relevant to adults. One way to help students adopt
more growth mindset beliefs is to model them yourself! Telling students about your own challenges and how you overcame them
is a fantastic way to do this.  
Teacher mindset has also been shown to inﬂuence classroom outcomes. The way that students perceive their teachers’ mindset,
both in general and towards individual students, inﬂuences how students engage in the classroom. 
Now that the value of having a growth mindset is established, you’ll move forward to speciﬁc techniques you can use to strength
student and mentee relationships, starting with Motivational Interviewing!


Motivational Interviewing
Motivational Interviewing (MI) is a tool that can be used to help motivate change. In a student-mentor relationship, motivational
interviewing could be used to help reduce problematic or challenging behavior, improve grades, improve attendance, or make any
other positive changes. 
MI is advantageous because it assumes that clients may be at di erent stages of change and have varying levels of motivation.
Importantly, MI doesn’t force students to change, but rather, allows them to explore their motivations and make decisions
collaboratively.  
There are three main stages at which you might encounter students:
-Sustain-talk: indicates that students want to continue their current behaviors and are not considering changes.  
-Ambivalence: many students may be ambivalent about changing; they may see some good reasons to make a
change, and some good reasons not to. Either way, a decision hasn’t been made.
-Change-talk: indicates that students want to change their behavior. 
While you may not know what these stages look like practically, you will get more familiar with them after sorting some examples! 
Sustain-talk
“I don’t like math, so there’s
no point in doing the
homework.”
“I can’t sit still in English class.
It’s way too boring.”
“I don’t want to get along with
my classmates. They are so
annoying.”
Ambivalence
“I don’t like science class, but I
want to make straight A's this
“I know my parents want me
to do well in school, but it’s so
year.”
boring.”
“I know  ghting gets me in
trouble, but I don’t know
what else to do."
Change-talk
“I’m going to start doing the
English homework every
night.”
“I’m going to do my best at
school.”
“I don’t want to get in trouble
anymore.”
One goal of MI is to increase the amount of change-talk and reduce ambivalence and sustain-talk. It is important to do this without
pressuring or making the student feel forced into it. One strategy for inducing change-talk is called resisting the righting reﬂex.
The “righting reﬂex” is an intuitive response that involves trying to make problems better. In the context of MI, the righting reﬂex
refers to providing a student with advice or instructions for what they can do to improve their situation. This is a natural reaction,
but it can sometimes have the opposite of the intended e ect.
This is because when a student is experiencing ambivalence towards change, being told what they should do may be o -putting
and make them feel pressured. This can cause power struggles, conﬂicts, and arguments that may ultimately make the person less
likely to want to change. To avoid this situation, it’s important to avoid the righting reﬂex and allow students to desire to change
independently.  
Here are some examples of the righting reﬂex: 
-“You really need to study more.”
-“You should stop being mean to your classmates. Don’t you know how that makes them feel?”
-“You’ll never be able to get a job if you don’t make better grades.” 
One strategy for avoiding the righting reﬂex is to apply the OARS method. Let's review it!


OARS
The OARS method is a way to create strong relationships in mentoring relationships. OARS includes Open-ended questions,
A rmations, Reﬂections, and Summary statements. Click through the image below to learn more about each aspect of the OARS
method.





Open-ended questions go beyond a simple “yes” or “no” or other one-word answer. These questions ask broad, overarching questions that
can be answered with as much or as little information as a client wants to provide. 
Some examples of open-ended questions include:  
“How was your weekend?” 
“What are your thoughts on this?” 
“How have you been feeling lately?”  

Affirmations are related to strengths-based approaches: they provide positive feedback for the mentee. This is important in showing your
acceptance of the mentee, building up self-esteem, and providing positive reinforcement for positive behaviors or statements such as
change-talk.
Some examples of affirmation include:  
“You put a lot of effort into studying for that test!”  
“You were a really caring older brother when you helped your sister yesterday.” 
“I think that’s a great idea!”

Reflections help mentors and mentees make meaning out of the conversations that they have. Reflective statements repeat, rephrase, or
paraphrase statements from mentees. Reflecting statements are helpful because they can:  
-confirm that both speakers are on the same page 
-show understanding rather than judgment 
-allow speakers to clarify if the listener misunderstood something 
-demonstrate empathy 

Summaries are a way to determine that everyone is on the same page and to provide closure for the end of the mentoring conversations.
There are three types of summaries:  
1. Collective—summary statements put together many ideas that have been mentioned in the conversation. For example, you might say,
“Your alarm didn’t go off, you hurried to eat breakfast, and you forgot your binder for science class.”
2. Linking—these summary statements link together different ideas in the conversation. They may connect a current statement back to
something previously discussed. For example, if your student tells you later on in the interaction that they couldn’t turn in their homework in
science class, you can say: “You were running late this morning and forgot your binder, so you couldn’t turn in the homework.”
3. Transitional—these statements transition from one topic to another. They can wrap up the current discussion and move the conversation
into a new direction or transition out of the mentoring interaction and close the conversation. For example, you can say: “Today we talked
about your stress with running late in the morning. Is there anything else you want to discuss?”  
It can also be helpful to include questions such as, “Is that right?” or “Is there anything else I missed?” to confirm that your summary is
accurate to the speaker’s intent and to provide an opportunity for any additional information to be added as needed.  
Now that you’ve gained a few tools to support student or mentee relationships, let’s review how mentoring interactions in a way
that supports growth through the Mentoring FAN and its counterpart, the Arc of Engagement. 


The Mentoring FAN 
The Mentoring FAN (Facilitating Attuned Interactions) is a model that can be used to facilitate stronger, more meaningful
mentoring interactions (Gilkerson & Price, 2020). This model aims to support attunement—or being aware of and in line with the
needs of the mentee.
Facilitating attuned interactions involves 5 stages, called “wedges,” in the model:  
-Calming: centering self before the interaction
-Feeling: listening to feelings  
-Thinking: exploring ideas
-Doing: supporting action 
-Reﬂecting: highlighting discoveries

Review the image below to learn more about each wedge of the Mentoring
FAN!






Centering Self
Before starting an interaction with a mentee, it is important to first make sure that you are in a calm, centered mindset. Taking a few deep
breaths, practicing mindfulness, or practicing other relaxation techniques can help ensure that you enter the interaction calmly and prepared
to best support mentees.  

Listening to Feelings
The next wedge of the mentoring FAN is addressing feelings. In this stage, mentors listen empathetically to mentees.  

Exploring Ideas
The next phase of the wedge is thinking through and exploring ideas. This goes outside of addressing how mentees feel and explores options.
 

Supporting Action
This next wedge of the model addresses supporting action and plans to make changes. It is important to not go to this phase too quickly
before mentees are ready.  

Highlighting Discoveries
Similar to reflections discussed in the OARS method, reflecting is a later stage in the mentoring FAN. This stage takes information stated by
the mentee and rephrases it to ensure that the mentor and mentee are on the same page and are mutually understood. 
One of the challenges of mentoring is that there may be a mismatch between the wedges that mentors and mentees are in. A
mentor or mentee may not be calm when they come to the interaction. A mentee may want to talk through feelings, while a mentor
may be thinking of solutions and want to explore ideas. The opposite can also be true; a mentor may think that a mentee wants to
talk through feelings when they want the mentor to support action. Mismatches between mentors and mentees are to be expected
in any mentorship relationship, so it is important to be aware when a mismatch may be happening and be able to redirect the
conversation so that mentor and mentee are on the same page. 
Below are examples of how a conversation can be redirected if there is a mismatch! 
-"I think I misunderstood what you were asking for. Can you clarify?"
-"I'm sorry, I just realized you weren't asking for practical advice and just wanted me to listen. Can we try that
again?"
-“Let’s take a few calm breaths together before we get started; I can tell something is bothering you and I want to
approach it in a clear headspace! 
Now that you have a model for approaching interactions with mentees, let's move forward to look at a particularly helpful structure
for creating safe, predictable interactions, the Arc of Engagement!


Arc of Engagement
One tool for examining the process of mentoring interactions is the Arc of Engagement (Gilkerson & Price, 2020). This describes
the four steps and stages of a mentoring interaction, listed below. 

Pre-contact

Before the interaction
Before meeting with mentees, it is important to prepare. Preparation can include reviewing any materials or plans for what to
address during the meeting, centering oneself to go into the interaction with an open mind, or reviewing what was covered in
the previous mentoring session.

Beginning

Start of the Interaction
It is important to start mentoring interactions in a way that allows the mentor and mentee to be comfortable and have clear
expectations for the meetings. Some ways to start the interaction are by asking open-ended questions, reviewing what was
talked about in the previous session, or sharing the plan for the current session.

Near the Middle

During the Interaction
This period is after any introductions or beginning interactions. Depending on the mentoring program, there may be di erent
steps to take during the mentoring session. The middle of the interaction may include open-ended questions, a rmations, or
reﬂections from the OARS method. It is also helpful to ask mentees questions like, "Is there anything else you'd like to
discuss?" or "Did I miss anything?" to open the door for any other key topics that the mentee wants to discuss.

End

Closing the Interaction
It is important to close the interaction e ectively. This is a time to use the summaries component of the OARS method to
describe key take-aways from the mentoring session and set goals for the next one.
Phew! You reviewed a lot of information, ranging from mindsets to approaching one’s student (and self!),  to interaction
structures. Why don’t you take a quick break for the next knowledge check? After the knowledge check, you’ll review CICO as a
speciﬁc example of mentoring programs as a Tier 2 support! 


Check In, Check Out
 

Reviewing a Popular and Pivotal Mentoring Program in Tier 2
One of the most common mentoring-based programs is the Check In, Check Out (CICO) system. This Tier 2 intervention matches a
mentor with a student and is most often used to help support behavior. 
CICO is an evidence-based practice, meaning that its e ectiveness is supported by many research studies (Campbell & Anderson,
2008; Drevon et al., 2018; Hawken & Horner, 2003; Smith et al., 2015). Some of the beneﬁts of CICO include:  
-reduction in problem behavior, as indicated by a reduction in ODRs
-higher grades and test scores
-increased attendance and school engagement

Watch this video from Edutopia that shows what CICO looks like!
Check-In / Check-Out: Providing a Daily Support System for Students
Check-In / Check-Out: Providing a Daily Support System for Students
As you heard from Principal Matthew Portell, CICO reassures students that there is an adult who is excited to see them every
morning and right before they leave in the afternoon. The value of this relationship cannot be overstated! It is through healthy,
mutually fulﬁlling relationships that behaviors can be addressed. Remember Mariah’s behavioral goals of listening, being on task,
and being nice? Let’s brieﬂy review principles of behavior that are important to CICO. 


Principles of Behavior
As a behavioral intervention, CICO depends on principles of behavior management. Review the following ﬂashcards for some of the
important concepts that are applied to the CICO system!
Reinforcement is anything that increases the
likelihood of a behavior being repeated over time.
Positive reinforcement increases the likelihood of
a behavior by adding a stimulus that is desired.
For example, giving a class of students a pizza
party for meeting their reading goals is positive
reinforcement when it makes the class more likely
to read more in the future.
When using CICO and reinforcers, it is also important to consider the function, or reason for, the behavior. Functions of behavior
are analyzed through functional behavior assessments (FBAs) and impact which rewards or reinforcers will be most e ective.
Review the ﬂashcards below to examine the four main functions of behavior.
Behavior is used to elicit a response from another
person (ex: raising your hand in class so that the
teacher calls on you)  
Behavior is used to be removed from a dif cult or
unpleasant circumstance (ex: pretending to be sick
to stay home from school) 
Behavior is used to get something (ex: pushing
someone else away from the slide so that you can
get on it)
Behavior is used to increase or decrease a
sensation, such as hearing, taste, touch, or smell
(ex: covering your eyes because the sun is too
bright) 
In CICO, students are able to choose rewards when their goals are met. These rewards o er positive reinforcement: a desired
stimulus (reward) is added to increase the likelihood that students repeat the positive behavior. Students in CICO also gain access
to attention through the mentoring relationship: this in itself can also reinforce positive behavior.
Now that we know a little more about the CICO intervention, let's apply the steps of the mentoring process to see how CICO is
implemented.


Step 1: Select Programs
The ﬁrst step in the CICO process is to select the speciﬁc programming that will be used. CICO has variations that are based on the
same principles you saw in the Edutopia video of daily behavior reports and reinforcement. These programs include: 
-Check In, Check Out: also called Behavior Education Program (BEP)  
-Check In, Check Up, Check Out: incorporates multiple check-ins per day 
-Breaks are Better: modiﬁed to support students with behavior maintained by avoidance/escape
-Check, Connect, and Expect: focus on externalizing and internalizing behavior; on full-time coach for all students
 
Decisions about which programs to implement will depend on the needs of the students in the school, available resources, and
school capacity. Results of needs assessments, current programming, and other data can help schools make an informed decision
about which program is the best ﬁt for their school community. 


Step 2: Preparing to Launch
Before implementing CICO, it’s important to have a plan, including an indication of the people and systems that will be used to
implement the intervention. Review the tabs below to examine some supports to have in place while preparing to launch CICO 
CICO Coordinator –
This team member is responsible for managing the CICO intervention. They may select facilitators/mentors, match them with
mentees, and consider logistical concerns, such as scheduling. They can also help manage data, report ﬁndings to MTSS teams, and
assess the progress of the intervention.   
Data System –
This is used to support progress monitoring for students receiving the intervention. There are many systems available for tracking
data from students’ CICO cards, such as Excel or PBIS Apps. Each school will likely have their own data tracking methods, but it is
important to plan this in advance, so everyone is on the same page.   
CICO Card Format –
 CICO uses daily progress reports (DPRs) or behavior report cards to measure student's behaviors during the day. Using a standard
template for CICO cards can help facilitate e cient and consistent intervention. Cards can be individualized based on student needs,
but usually include the student’s name, grade level, date, and a point scale for behavior expectations. Behavior expectations can be
taken from the school-wide behavior expectations, or based on behaviors that are most relevant to the particular student's goals. 
Review the images below for examples of elementary, middle, and high
school CICO cards. Click each to enlarge. 
Elementary school example CICO card
Middle school example CICO card
High school example CICO card


Step 3: Recruit, Screen, and Train Mentors and Mentees
The next stage of the process is to determine who the mentors and mentees involved in the program will be. For CICO, mentors are
also called facilitators and do the daily interactions with students. CICO facilitators can be school-based mental health clinicians,
school counselors, social workers or psychologists, behavior specialists, or other educators who are available. Importantly, CICO
facilitators should not be the same classroom teacher that the student goes to during the day.  
Once facilitators have been identiﬁed, training is provided before the intervention begins. Depending on the exact iteration of CICO
used, there may be a manual or training modules for the facilitators to review. CICO coordinators or experienced facilitators may
also provide the training for the CICO facilitators.  
Students also need to be selected to participate in the CICO intervention. As a Tier 2 Intervention, CICO is used with a few students:
those whose needs are not entirely met by Tier 1, but are not in need of Tier 3 support. Below are some indicators that students may
be a good ﬁt for CICO.   
Received 2-5 o ce discipline referrals within a month
No behaviors that pose risk of harm to self or others (indicates Tier 3 support) 
New students adjusting to the school environment
More than 5 absences per month
Behavior is maintained by attention
Scores on formal screeners or assessments, such as the Strengths and Di culties Questionnaire (SDQ),
indicating a match for Tier 2 services


Step 4: Match Mentors and Mentees
Once students are identiﬁed as a good match for the CICO intervention, the next stage is to match them with a facilitator. Strong
relationships are an essential part of the e ectiveness of the intervention, so it is important to consider many factors when
matching facilitators with mentees. Review the chart below for some factors to consider when matching  
 
Review the tabs below for some factors to consider when matching.   
Availability –
CICO requires a signiﬁcant investment of time from facilitators, so it is important to align expectations and ensure that any facilitator
matched with a mentee has the ability to commit to the full program. In CICO, facilitators are also required to be available
consistently for morning and afternoon meetings each day. Consistency is important for the e ectiveness of the intervention, so it is
essential to verify the matched facilitator's availability for this commitment. 
Facilitator and Mentee Preferences –
The preferences of facilitators and mentees are also important to consider when making a match. Di erent personality types,
mentoring styles, and skillsets can make a di erence in the strength of relationships that are built by mentors and mentees. One way
to assess the preferences of facilitators and mentees is to administer surveys before matching to determine what each person is
looking for. For example, some students may want a mentor with a very positive, upbeat, and energetic personality, while other
students may prefer someone more direct and straightforward. Considering preferences can help make a stronger relationship from
the start. 
Relationship with Student –
For CICO, facilitators are typically already working in the school environment and may have an existing relationship with the student.
It is important for CICO facilitators to not be any teachers that the student has. This is because teachers are needed to complete the
behavior report card during the day. It is also important that CICO facilitators for a student not be any family members or parents, but
more neutral third parties. Matching can also consider if the CICO facilitator has an existing positive rapport with the student already
—this may help build a stronger relationship. 


Step 5: Implementing Intervention
This is where the intervention happens! There are ﬁve core components to the CICO process:
1
2
3
4
5
Daily morning check-ins
Daily progress or behavior report card
Teacher feedback
Daily afternoon check-outs
Family and school collaboration

Review each stage in more detail below!
Implementation of CICO
Review the process for checking in and checking out. 
Morning Check In
Step 1
Morning check-ins happen as the student arrives at school. They can occur during the ﬁrst 10 minutes of the school
day or before, depending on what works best for the student and facilitator.  
Some questions that you can ask in the morning check-in include:  
How was your night last night? 
How was the bus ride/car ride/walk to school? 
Morning check-ins also review the previous day’s card, and either provide praise for reaching the goal or explore how
to meet the goal today. Facilitators also show students the reinforcement options for if the goal is met.
Daily Progress Report
Step 2
This is the Daily Progress Report (DPR). Throughout the day, the student will be scored on how well they met each
expectation, typically on a scale from 0-2, with 0 meaning not meeting expectations, 1 meaning partially meeting
expectations, and 2 meaning fully meeting expectations. At the beginning of the day, students will be given this card
and reminded of the expectations and goals for the day, as well as the rewards for positive behaviors. 
Teacher Feedback
Step 3
Throughout the day, teachers ﬁll in the DPR based on the student’s behavior. Ratings are based on behaviors
observed during class and should be consistent and aligned with the school-wide behavior expectations. 
Afternoon Check Out
Step 4
At the end of the day, the DPR will be reviewed. If the student met their goal number of points during the day, then
the student will be given the reinforcement o ered earlier in the day and verbal praise. 
It is important to provide speciﬁc praise so that the child knows exactly what they did well and what to do again in the
future. For example, telling a child “You did amazing today!” is nice for the student to hear, but might not give them
as much direction in what to repeat in the future as a praise statement like, “You were amazing today! You did all of
your work in class, paid attention to the teacher’s directions all day, and you even helped one of your classmates with
their homework. Way to go!”
Family/School Collaboration
Step 5
Family-school collaboration can help support the student’s progress. Sending CICO cards home can help parents
reinforce behavior goals. If a student does well, parents can also provide positive reinforcement to the student. If a
student does not meet their goal, parents can also help problem-solve and encourage them to improve the next day. 
It is important to encourage parents to not add punitive consequences based on the DPR, but rather, reinforce
positive behaviors and encourage progress.
Summary
You've reviewed the ﬁve core components of the CICO process! Well done!


Step 6: Monitoring Progress and Fading Out
As in all interventions at all stages of MTSS, progress monitoring is an important part of the process! Progress for CICO can be
monitored using the data system set up in the planning phase of the process. Data to track includes: 
-student and facilitator names
-dates
-number and percentage of points earned each day
-whether goal was met
-any notes, such as student illness, facilitator absences, or school breaks
- student outcomes, such as grades, test scores, attendance, or o ce discipline referrals (ODRs)
-ﬁdelity of implementation (how closely facilitators follow guidelines for implementation)
This data can be used to determine if the intervention should be adjusted, if any changes to implementation are needed, if the
student needs further support, or if they are ready to fade out. 
If the student consistently meets their goal for several days or weeks, then CICO meetings can be reduced from every day to every
other day, or once a week, and so on, until the intervention is stopped. It is important to not stop too suddenly, but to build up the
student’s independence gradually. This process is called fading out.   
On the other hand, if a student is not improving or meeting their goal for several days or weeks, it is important to reconsider the
intervention. There may be several reasons why the intervention is not improving behavior, and these reasons will inﬂuence the
course of action that may be best for the student. 

Click through the tabs to review some of the reasons why CICO may not be
working as expected!
Fidelity of Intervention –
It may be that the intervention is not being implemented as intended. Maybe the facilitator is unable to meet with the student
consistently at the agreed upon time, or the student is absent from school and missing check-ins. There are many other barriers that
could be impacting implementation, so it is important to use a ﬁdelity measure to determine if the intervention is being used as
intended. We’ve attached the Check In, Check Out Implementation Measure below. Ask yourself: are all steps of the process being
completed? Are the facilitator and student both engaged? Depending on the answer to these questions, there may be di erent next
steps to take.   
Click Here for the Check In, Check Out Implementation Measure
Goal Setting –
It is important to have goals that meet students where they are and that are not too challenging or too easy. It’s great to set high
expectations for students, but if a student is consistently trying their best and is unable to meet their goals, it may be necessary to
adjust to something more realistic and gradually build up over time. On the converse side of this, goals may not be challenging
enough, and this may also lead to a lack of engagement. 
Match with Intervention Level –
Another reason that CICO may not be working is that the student has greater needs than can be met through the program. Referring
students to Tier 3 interventions may be needed, especially if a student enters a crisis, exhibits behaviors that are harmful to self or
others, or if other needs are indicated. 
Strength of Reinforcement –
CICO depends on positive reinforcement. There are several reasons that the provided reinforcement is not enough for a student to
respond positively to. The student may not have a strong relationship with the facilitator, the function of the behavior may not have
been correctly identiﬁed, or the reinforcement may be applied inconsistently. 
Based on these potential barriers to progress, di erent plans of action may be used. 

Review options for adjusting the intervention below.
MI DDAY   C H E C K - I N
F UN C T I O N - SPE C I F I C   R E I N F O R C E ME N T
A DDR E SSI N G  SE T T I N G  E V E N T S
In this variation of CICO, an extra check-in is scheduled during the middle of the day to increase the amount of reinforcement that a
student receives. If students have met half of their goal by the half-way point, then a reward will be given. This version is also called
Check-In, Check-Up, Check-Out (CICUCO). 
MI DDAY   C H E C K - I N
F UN C T I O N - SPE C I F I C   R E I N F O R C E ME N T
A DDR E SSI N G  SE T T I N G  E V E N T S
For a student who is not responding to the reinforcement provided through CICO, an FBA may be used to determine the function of
the behavior. If the function is something other than attention, such as access or escape, the student's reward can be modiﬁed to
something that is more reinforcing and desirable for the student. For example, Breaks are Better is a modiﬁcation of CICO that
focuses on the escape function of behavior and provides opportunities for students to take extra breaks.  
MI DDAY   C H E C K - I N
F UN C T I O N - SPE C I F I C   R E I N F O R C E ME N T
A DDR E SSI N G  SE T T I N G  E V E N T S
Setting events are any circumstances that contribute to the presence of a behavior. For example, a student may run out of the
classroom when the teacher presents an exam. In this case, the event of handing out an exam can be considered a setting event.
Teacher or facilitator observations or an FBA can be used to determine what setting events could be occurring. Then, those setting
events can be monitored and adjusted as needed.  
You’ve done a fantastic job reviewing what mentoring programs are and why they’re important, how to implement a mentoring
program e ectively, and speciﬁc mentoring strategies (e.g., Motivational Interviewing) and programs (e.g., CICO). After this
knowledge check and a summary, you will have completed this lesson! 
Great work!
Let's review the lesson.
-There are many mentoring programs that are applied in the school setting that involve pairing non-parental
adults or peer mentors with mentees to provide support for behavior, academics, or social and emotional
outcomes.
-Mentoring strategies include Motivational Interviewing, OARS, and emphasizing a growth mindset among others.
-The Arc of Engagement and the Mentoring FAN are models that describe the process of a mentoring interaction.
- Check-in, Check-Out (CICO) is a system of mentoring that pairs adults with students to support positive behavior
and involves Daily Progress Reports measuring student behavior.






@@@@@Self-Care and Coping for Educators
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 4 of 5
Self-Care and Coping for Educators


Outcomes:
1. Extend the prevention perspective of MTSS Tier 2 to self-care for teachers and sta 
2. Identify challenges of planning and implementing Tier 2 supports and developing coping strategies 
3.  Explore self-care best practices of educators managing Tier 2 implementation
4. Select self-care strategies to integrate into your day, week, month, and year 


Self-Care: Where Do We Start?
 

Ensuring You Can Cross the Bridge in the First Place

Self-Care. Wellness. Coping Strategies. 
We hear these words so often that it’s hard to know what they mean anymore. And yet, we're
told we should take care of ourselves so we can be our best selves. 


Where do we even begin?
Students are coming to you? with big feelings and sometimes even bigger histories of Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and
trauma (recall our discussion of ACEs and trauma from the Tier 1 Lesson, "Wellness Enhancement for Students, Part 2").  
In the middle of helping them learn how to cope, you are teaching students core academic content, test-taking strategies, and how
to think critically.  
We as administrators, educators and collaborating sta  come with personal ACEs and trauma
histories as well. 
We’re told that we can’t pour from an empty cup, but where do we even ﬁnd a moment to think
of what we need? 

Remember what we said in the All Hands on Deck course? MTSS framework
is not just for students.
MTSS is designed to support the adults in the system as well.
Although it sounds like a cliché, we really do need to look after our own health and wellbeing  to e ectively care for our students
and others in our lives.  
Furthermore, this is not limited to classroom teachers. All adults in the educational system—from families to administrators, bus
operators to custodians, interventionists to school and community mental health sta —care for students.  
When the adults feel stressed and overwhelmed, our students can feel it, even if they aren’t privy to the details.    
When we talk about self-care and coping, we face additional challenges when working with
students requiring Tier 2 interventions. We will talk more about self-care and coping
strategies, and how to include them in our existing routines. We will also note how school and
district leaders can support self-care for educators and sta .  
Before we move on to reviewing speciﬁc Tier 2 challenges, take a moment to think about and
jot down your current self-care practices. How do these align with your personal and
professional goals?
C O NT I NU E


The Challenges of Tier 2
 Navigating Planning and Implementation of Targeted Supports
Students seated at tables, writing in workbooks
Working with students in need of Tier 2 supports can have its own set of complications.  
Many Tier 2 supports take place in the classroom, calling for teachers to integrate interventions into what they're already doing. 

Let's look at some speci c challenges educators may encounter when
implementing Tier 2 supports in the classroom
-At the level of Tier 2 interventions, there is a great deal of variability in student needs. Some students may need short-term
Tier 2 interventions, and quickly move back to solely needing Tier 1 supports. For others, it may become apparent that they
additionally need Tier 3 support.  Still, other students may spend a signiﬁcant amount of time in Tier 2, making small gains
over time. This is a lot to manage. 
-You may have some of your more observant students ask you why some of their classmates are getting rewards or extra
support while others are not. Without discussing individual students, you might explain that fair is not everyone getting the
same thing, but rather everyone getting what they need. This is a big concept, especially for our younger learners, but an
important lesson, nonetheless. You might enlist help from your school counselor to discuss this further in a classroom
guidance lesson.  
-As you know, students respond di erently to support. Some students may respond quickly and positively. We love to see it!
Others, however, may need more time to grasp the rules of a new behavior plan and prefer more immediate rewards. Neither is
wrong; these are just individual di erences. 
-Another challenge of providing Tier 2 supports is that often, students in need of further support at Tier 2 have multiple needs.
This makes it hard to know where to start and what to address. Here are three reminders to ground yourself in! 
Adding additional interventions, monitoring student progress, reviewing the data, and attending meetings (all in addition to the
usual job duties!) can be overwhelming.     
Don't lose hope! 

Here are three reminders to ground yourself in!   
-Take some pressure o  yourself by knowing that you cannot address every need at once. With your MTSS team,
select the most pressing concerns. It’s up to the team to decide what to work on ﬁrst. Families' perspectives are
especially important here. You can select as many concerns as you wish; however, choosing 2 to 3 of the top issues
tends to be manageable.   
-Know that not every problem is yours to personally solve. This is a tough reminder to internalize, but it's true. We
are only in control of our own behavior and choices. We certainly can e ect change in our students and families
through positive relationships, changing our own behavior and reactions to inﬂuence others’ behavior, and by
adjusting the environment to support positive behaviors. We also work with our MTSS team to reach all of our
students and families. Think of these actions as planting seeds for the future. 
-As educators and collaborating sta , we support students and families, but ultimately, they make decisions about
their own behavior and choices. For example, the MTSS team might suggest family counseling for a student and
their primary caregivers. However, the caregivers might tell you they are not interested in counseling. Although we
may not agree, we need to respect their decision and o er other tools and supports. Remember too that these
decisions may be rooted in cultural practices. This may be a time for us to examine our implicit biases and seek
further information (from the family themselves or in the form of additional professional development) so we
may better understand and serve our families.    

There are several strategies that can help you integrate Tier 2 interventions
into your classroom. Let's take a look at two of those below.
R E WA R D  SC H E DUL E S
R E I N F O R C E ME N T   >   PUN I SH ME N T
Students receiving Tier 2 support typically have di culty waiting for performance feedback or a reward. More immediate
reinforcement tends to be more e ective and concrete. Heiniger et al. (2022) recommend starting with a reinforcement schedule
slightly more often than the problem behavior occurs.  For example, if the problem behavior happens about once an hour, your
reinforcement schedule might be every 30 or 45 minutes. Remember that the student still needs to earn the reinforcement!
 Educators and sta  should provide as many opportunities as possible for success to help them reach the goal (and the reinforcement)
quickly and consistently.   
R E WA R D  SC H E DUL E S
R E I N F O R C E ME N T   >   PUN I SH ME N T
More schools and districts are moving away from taking away recess time as a punishment. We also know that reinforcement works
more e ectively than punishment (Scott et al., 2023). A shift in mindset from “punishing poor behavior choices” to “catching
students doing right and rewarding them” takes time but is especially beneﬁcial.


Best Practices for Self-care and Coping
 

Managing the Demands of Tier 2 Mental and Behavioral Health Interventions
Identifying which students require Tier 2 supports and allocating time to plan and implement interventions can be challenging
and, at times, overwhelming. 
Below we have listed a few strategies that can help you cope with and manage Tier 2 implementation. Click to enlarge.
Graphic illustrating ways to cope with and manage Tier 2 implementation
Even with the best laid plans, implementing Tier 2 support in the classroom requires lots of
time and energy. 
In a study surveying teachers about the barriers to implementing Tier 2 behavioral health
strategies in the classroom, the most frequently endorsed barriers were being distracted or
forgetting due to competing demands, and feeling “stressed, frustrated, or burned out”
(Lawson et al., 2022).
Be on the lookout for signs of burnout in yourself. This may be hard to detect, as it can start
innocently enough with feeling tired and overwhelmed at work — what educator hasn’t felt
that way? However, these issues (see clickthrough below) can begin to interfere with your
functioning at home, at work, or in other settings. 









Exhaustion

Decreased job performance

Lower job satisfaction

More absenteeism at work

Decreased quality of life

Lower self-efficacy, or confidence in your abilities

Anxiety

Depression
Teachers experiencing burnout may have di culty delivering instruction and tolerating disruptions in the classroom. These
teacher di culties are linked to decreased student motivation and increased student behavior problems. This makes it harder for
teachers to positively inﬂuence student mental health and discipline outcomes (Brady et al., 2022). 
We have talked extensively about prevention being our most e ective line of defense in working with students who are
experiencing social, emotional, and behavioral issues. Prevention is key for addressing burnout in ourselves too! 
We present a variety of suggestions here. You can choose to adopt as many or as few as you need. Let’s take a closer look!

Supporting Our Physical Health –
As di cult as it might be to ﬁnd time for healthy meals and exercise, these really are investments in ourselves. To make these
behavior changes stick, try not to change everything at once. By making small changes one at a time and building from there, we are
more likely to make these changes more permanent. 
You might decide to walk outdoors after dinner for 10 minutes on 3 days this week. And nothing says you can’t walk for longer if
you’re enjoying yourself! Listen to your favorite music, a interesting podcast, or ask a friend or family member to join you. Another
way to make movement a regular part of our routine is to ﬁnd whatever type of movement is enjoyable for you. It could be anything
from dancing to kicking a soccer ball in the yard with your children or grandchildren. Getting some movement can be a powerful
way to change your outlook. 

Take a Moment for Mindfulness –
When you hear “meditation,” you might think of sitting completely still for 30 minutes or more. Don’t be daunted! Just a few
minutes a day of stillness (physically and mentally) can have positive e ects. You can try some formal meditation techniques with
many free and fee-based apps available, or you can practice mindfulness by breathing and quieting the mind amid the busyness of
life. 

Engaging in Hobbies –
Speaking of the busyness of life, it can be easy for our hobbies and interests to fall o  the list once we get caught up in work, family,
and other responsibilities. Including time for activities that bring us joy for joy’s sake is another form of self-care. These do not need
to cost a lot of time or money; they just need to be things you enjoy. They can be solitary pursuits or activities you can do with others.
The options are endless!   

Check out the short video below for more on how to include mindfulness in
our already busy lives!
How Can I Practice Mindfulness if I'm Always Busy? Practicing Mindfulness in a Fast-Paced W……
How Can I Practice Mindfulness if I'm Always Busy? Practicing Mindfulness in a Fast-Paced W


Setting Healthy Boundaries
This next suggestion is easier said than done, especially in our increasingly connected society.
We discussed some strategies around boundary-setting (i.e., grading time, o ce hours, and
non-negotiable breaks) in Tier 1's "Wellness Enhancement for Part 1: for Educators" Setting
boundaries around workload and work hours is an important part of self-care, but only you can
do it for yourself. Let’s take a look at some examples.
 Tell families and colleagues that you will
respond to emails at set times each day
(for example, and 7:30 am and 3:30 pm).
Help others manage their expectations
around not getting an immediate
response.
Silence work email noti cations outside of
your work hours. In the event of an
emergency, your school and district
leadership can reach you.
Leaving work on time (or close to it) is an
eternal struggle. Here are some ideas to
maximize your ef ciency while at work.
Try time batching or setting aside an
amount of time to work on one task. For
example, give yourself 20 minutes to
respond to emails before moving to the
next task. The idea is to group similar
tasks together. 
Other prefer the Pomodoro technique,
where you work for 25 minute intervals
with 5 minute breaks in between. After 4
blocks of work, you take a 15 to 30 minute


Relationship Building
Building relationships with work colleagues and mentors can help us manage stress and grow professionally. You may naturally
form these relationships with other teachers on your grade-level or content-area team. Reaching out to your colleagues is a great
way to ﬁnd safe spaces to discuss feelings and frustrations, as well as to learn tips and tricks to manage your workload.  
Seeking mentorship from an experienced teacher (or counselor, psychologist, etc.) can normalize some of your experiences and
support you through di cult situations. In terms of working at Tier 2, your mentor is a great resource for tips on how to structure
Tier 2 interventions in your classroom and track data in a manageable way. They may also have advice on working with the MTSS
team at your school to support your students receiving Tier 2 interventions. 
How do you  nd a mentor? If you are new to teaching or new to your school, your site may assign you a mentor. If you and
that person click, great!  
If you’d like to seek out additional support from a more experienced staff member, consider asking them for lunch or coffee
or reach out to ask speci c questions. Your school may also have planning committees for various events (Red Ribbon
Week, Read Across America, etc.). This could be a way to connect with colleagues outside of your grade-level or content-
area team!


Continuously Enhancing Knowledge and Skills 
As we mentioned earlier in this lesson, professional development is to build upon and add to current knowledge and skills.
Training programs can enhance what you as educators already know and introduce new methods that continue to emerge. Think
about where you personally need to build up your Tier 2 skills and focus on opportunities speciﬁc to gaining additional knowledge
in those areas. 
One way to identify areas for growth is your comfort level. For instance, if you are comfortable with and conﬁdent in your
intervention delivery skills, great! That area may not be the most pressing need for you right now. On the other hand, are you
uncomfortable with analyzing data? Is this a task you avoid? If so, then you might need additional skill-building here. 
C O NT I NU E


Putting Self-care Strategies into Practice


Establishing Routines for Personal Wellbeing
With a full load at work, lots of things to manage at home, and (trying to have) a social life,
adding self-care and coping strategies to an already full plate can feel impossible. In our
Wellness Enhancement lesson  we mentioned, and you’ve likely heard this before, “put on your
own oxygen mask before assisting others.” If we don’t take care of ourselves and keep pushing
forward, there usually comes a point where we become so physically and emotionally
exhausted that we just can’t do it anymore. It’s important that we stop putting ourselves last,
so we don’t let ourselves get to the point of burnout.   

Let's look at some practical ways to add self-care to our daily routines!
Look at your current daily routines and think
about small self-care practices you can add.
Could you take 2-3 minutes for some
mindfulness or breathing exercises while
1 of 6
making your coffee? Adding a step or two to
an existing routine makes the new behavior
more likely to stick!
Take short breaks throughout your day to
breathe, stretch, or practice mindfulness or
meditation. You might like to set reminders on
your phone for this.
2 of 6
3 of 6
We have all rushed out the door without
breakfast or snarfed a granola bar at our
desks in between classes or meetings. You
might have even packed a healthy lunch, only
to bring it back home in the evening,
untouched. While busy days happen, eating a
healthy meal should not be a luxury! Try to
make the most nutritious choices possible.
When you are at work, be at work in all
capacities: physically and mentally. When you
4 of 6
are off work, be off. Remember that most
emails and texts can wait until the next
business day. If there is truly an emergency,
your school and district leadership can and
Sometimes we can be our own worst critics.
will contact you.
Observe how you talk to yourself. Is that the
way you would talk to your partner, children,
family members, or friends? If not, try this tip:
every time you talk to yourself negatively,
counter it with a positive statement or
reframe. You might feel silly at  rst, but after a
while, these positive statements outnumber
the negative ones.
5 of 6
6 of 6
Writing down a few things you’re thankful for
each morning sets a positive tone for the day. If
journaling is not your thing, simply say words of
gratitude aloud or write them on your bathroom
mirror.
"Talk to yourself like you would to someone you love."
Brené  Brown, American Professor and Writer
Let's check out some self-care suggestions to consider adding on a weekly, monthly, and yearly basis!

Weekly Self-care (click to enlarge)
A graphic recommending self-care suggestions to consider adding to your week

Monthly Self-care 
Waterfall ﬂowing into a pool
About once a month, schedule a “me” day. When we think about self-care, we might imagine a spa day with cucumbers on our
eyes. While this can certainly be your “me” day, it doesn’t have to be if that’s not what you’re into! Take a day or even half a day and
do what you like. Go get co ee from your favorite café, wander around the farmer’s market, go for a long run, or meet up with a
friend for a leisurely brunch. If you can manage it, maybe drive to the coast for a beach day, or go to a state park for a hike.
Touch base with yourself
We've talked at length about progress monitoring for students. Likewise, it's important for us to reﬂect on our own goal progress.
Take some time each month to set goals and check in on how you’re doing. For example, if your goal is to connect more with your
friends, you can review your month and see if you met up with or called any of them. 
Learn new things
Earlier we mentioned seeking professional development which is not typically thought of as a self-care strategy, but it can be a
powerful tool. Are there any o erings from your district or other professional organizations to build your skills and competencies?
For example, many organizations o er on-demand webinars on a variety of topics. Check their course catalogs to see what would
be useful to you.

Yearly Self-care 
If it’s an option for you, take a vacation or a break
from work to recharge. Even a short reprieve can
work wonders and refresh your perspective. 
Investigate attending a conference or a
retreat. This could be for personal or
professional growth. There are many options:
professional conferences, like the Southeast
School Behavioral Health conference; a yoga
retreat, or a retreat through your faith-based
community or organization. If it is a
professional conference, check with your
school and district for any travel funding that
may be available. 
Take some time to re ect on everything
you’ve accomplished in the year and
congratulate yourself on your successes. It
doesn’t matter how small you think they are,
list every single one! From there, consider
new goals for the upcoming year. You can
think of goals during the holiday or new year
season, or at the beginning of the school year. 

Before we move on, let's hear from teachers about the self-care practices
they use!
2020 Teachers of the Year on practicing self care
2020 Teachers of the Year on practicing self care

Take a moment for this exercise before we move forward. Check each box as
you go through the list.
-Revisit the self-care practices you jotted down near the start of this lesson. 
-Grab that piece of paper or refer to the notes you made on your device. 
-Take a detailed look at the list of self-care strategies you're currently using. 
-Which ones are working for you? Next, make a list of self-care strategies you'd like to try.
-Where will they ﬁt into your day, week, or month?
-When will you give them a try?
Now that we've covered self-care practices you can incorporate at di erent levels in your life, let's hone in on self-care at work.   


Self-care in the Workplace
We've discussed many self-care ideas in this lesson. What about coping with the demands of
working in education and implementing Tier 2 interventions?
Think for a moment about realistic expectations for the work you need to accomplish. You
could stay at school until 7 pm, but that’s not really reasonable. If you do need to stay after
school to ﬁnish up some things, prioritize the most pressing tasks. You may also set a timer
(like we often do for students) and get as much done as you can within that limit. There are
times of the year (for example, when report cards are about to go out, or toward the end of the
school year) that might require longer days. However, if long days are a regular occurrence for
you, it might be time to seek support from your administration and colleagues. 
Asking for help from admin and colleagues can be tough. You might worry that others will
think you can’t handle your workload. If you have tried to maximize your e ciency but are still
struggling, it’s okay to seek support. Perhaps you have more students in need of Tier 2 support
than some of your colleagues, and this requires more time for planning, progress monitoring,
and data analysis. Reaching out to your admin and colleagues with speciﬁc areas in which you
need help can make the discussion more focused and solution-oriented.

Self-Care Support from School and District Leadership
A great deal of support for employee self-care comes from school and district leaders. District leadership plays a crucial role in
setting the tone for schools across the district. This tone and culture include self-care. 
Take a look at the following ways district leaders can show their care for teachers and sta .
-Is it a part of the district culture to support one another so we can better support students and families? 
-Do district leaders advocate for teachers to ensure reasonable workloads?
-Do leaders streamline district procedures to reduce redundant paperwork, meetings, and extra duties?
-Are mandatory meetings scheduled during contract hours?
-Do employees receive compensation for meetings and training held during the summer or outside contract hours?
-Are district leaders visible in school buildings and at district events?
Respecting the time of teachers and sta  is an incredibly important practice. Being physically present is also a powerful way to
show support and solidarity. Furthermore, do teachers and sta  feel safe asking for help? 
School and district leaders play a large and important role in creating a safe space for professionals to express their needs and
concerns. 
“Self-care support from district leaders looks like taking things o  educators' plates rather
than adding to them..”
- Brandi Simonsen, Professor, Special Education, University of Connecticut and Co-Director, National Technical Assistance
Center for Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports.

Self-Care Support for School and District Leadership
Adults standing in a circle with hands overlapping in the center
School and district leaders may wonder how to make their workplace more supportive of teachers and sta . SAMHSA's guide,
Addressing Burnout in the Behavioral Health Workforce Through Organizational Strategies, was designed for mental health workers
but has many organizational strategies that can apply to educators. 
The following table shows organizational and individual approaches to addressing burnout. Click to enlarge.
SAMHSA organization and individual strategies for burnout
We've discussed some of these individual strategies earlier in this lesson. For the organization strategies, notice how these large-
scale interventions support individual self-care and lead to better outcomes for both workers and the organization.
The entire Addressing Burnout in the Behavioral Health Workforce Through Organizational Strategies is linked below. School and
district leaders are encouraged to take a closer read.
SAMHSA Addressing Burnout.pdf
8.7 MB
One way that employers or places of work can support employee's wellbeing is through an employee assistance program. Let's
look at that more closely now!


What about Employee Assistance Programs?
Many employer-sponsored health plans include an employee assistance program (EAP) with a few no-cost counseling sessions.
This is a good way to seek counseling if you have not done so before. However, the number of sessions is usually limited, so if you’d
like to continue seeing your counselor you will need to ﬁnd out about the cost. Some counselors in the community operate on a
sliding scale, where the amount you pay is based on your income. You can also call your insurance provider and ask which
counselors are in-network, or ask your primary doctor for a referral. 
If you haven’t sought counseling before, it can seem daunting. One of the most important factors in a successful counseling
relationship and positive therapy outcomes is the ﬁt between you and the therapist, sometimes called the therapeutic alliance
(Flückiger et al., 2018). So if you don’t feel like you connect with your counselor or like they “get” you, don’t give up! It might be
that you just haven’t found the right person yet. 
You might be wondering how often you would talk to a therapist or how long you would be in therapy. While this looks di erent for
everyone, therapy is not meant to last a lifetime! When you and your therapist agree on goals, you will work on reaching them
together and developing new skills in the process. 
Above all, self-care is not sel sh!
When our own physical, mental, and emotional needs are met, we can be the best version of ourselves. Only then do we truly have
the capacity to function in all the roles that matter to us:
Word cloud with family and professional role words
It is not uncommon for those of us in education and other helping professions to consider others’ needs before our own. However,
when we consistently look after our own needs, there are many beneﬁts. Self-care translates into: 
Staving o  burnout
Better work-life balance
Higher job satisfaction
C O NT I NU E
Great work!


Let's review the lesson.
-Being an educator or a collaborating sta  member is one of the toughest jobs out there. Supporting students with
Tier 2 interventions takes it to another level! It is imperative that we care for ourselves and bring our best skills for
all of our students, but especially those requiring Tier 2 support and beyond.
-You know from being in the classroom and the school environment that our students watch us all day long. One of
the most powerful ways to teach is by example. When we practice self-care and model it for our students, we are
showing them how important it is. When we take care of ourselves and advocate for our needs, we are teaching our
students to do the same. 
-Rather than communicating through maladaptive behaviors, we can teach our students over time to use words
and reach out for help in socially appropriate ways. When enough teachers, sta , and administrators model self-
care, it becomes infused within the culture of our school and district. 
-Asking for help should not seem out of place! It is best to seek support for yourself before you are
completely overwhelmed and burned out. Look for signs of stress and overwhelm
before those feelings get too big. Often, we are really good at spotting these signs in
our students. We typically know when a blow-up or tantrum may be coming, and how
to try and prevent it. It’s time for us to use those skills with ourselves.
-Don’t be afraid to seek out professional support and therapy services. At times, a therapist can help us hone in on
these cues and craft a plan to release the pressure before we reach full burnout.
-You take care of everyone else; you deserve to take care of yourself too.
Classroom Programs for Mental Health and Emotional Literacy




NEXT LESSON
Lesson 5 of 5
@@@@@Classroom Programs for Mental Health and Emotional Literacy


Outcomes:
1. Review the concepts of Mental Health Literacy (MHL) and Positive Health and Wellbeing (PHW)
2. Distinguish between Tier 1 and Tier 2 MHL and PHW interventions and discuss layering supports for students
3. Explore MHL and PHW evidence-based curriculum and interventions
4. Review best practices for implementing classroom mental health and emotional literacy


Incorporating MHL and PHW in Classrooms  


Fostering a Supportive Learning Environment for Student Wellbeing
The purpose of mental health literacy (MHL) and positive health and wellbeing (PHW) programs and curriculum is to equip
students, educators, and the entire school community with the knowledge, skills, and understanding needed to promote mental
wellbeing, reduce stigma surrounding mental health issues, and provide appropriate support to individuals facing social and
emotional challenges. 
Incorporating MHL and PHW into the curriculum allows students the opportunity to learn and practice the skills they need to
manage their emotions and build positive relationships. That is, with such programs we can help prevent the escalation of
emotional and behavioral problems in the classroom and promote better mental health outcomes for students.  
Let’s begin with a review of the concepts of MHL and PHW.    


Deﬁning MHL and PHW
People on a bridge looking at a waterfall
What is Mental Health Literacy?
 MHL is about having knowledge of not only mental health, but also an understanding of mental health disorders which helps with
the recognition, management, and prevention of the disorders (Jorm et al., 1997). 
That is, MHL is the cornerstone for mental health promotion, and essential for fostering emotional wellbeing, reducing stigma,
and equipping young individuals with the skills they need to navigate their mental health e ectively.
As we discussed in previous courses, students spend the majority of their time in schools, making them the ideal place to teach
students about MHL.
“Mental health literacy is not a luxury, it's a necessity. When students have a better
understanding of mental health, they are better equipped to navigate the challenges of
adolescence and young adulthood, and to lead fulﬁlling lives.”
- Jane Philpott, Dean of the Faculty of Health Sciences at Queen's University  

MHL is about:
-understanding how to maintain good mental health
-understanding various mental health disorders and treatments
-enhancing help-seeking behavior (Kutcher et al., 2016).
The teacher’s role in the classroom is not about diagnosing students or suggesting treatment recommendations. But they
can teach their students about mental health literacy, respond to student's needs, and request assistance from school
mental health professionals when there are serious concerns. 
What is Positive Health and Wellbeing?
Social learning and emotional learning are the process of acquiring and applying knowledge, skills, and attitudes to enhance
mental health, manage emotions, and maintain positive relationships (Weissberg & Cascarino, 2013). In these lessons, we use the
term positive health and wellbeing (PHW) to apply the same concepts.
A river running through lush green mountains

PHW is all about:
-developing emotional intelligence and self-awareness.
-effective communication, empathy, and relationship-building skills.
-learning to manage emotions, make responsible decisions, and cultivate positive social interactions.
As mentioned, the goal of PHW is to help students develop skills and abilities to integrate thinking, feeling, and behaving to
succeed at important developmental tasks.
When individuals do not master these skills, they often develop behavior issues that, in turn, can interfere with their functioning in
school, their ability to regulate their emotions, and their ability to form positive relationships.
PHW emphasizes ﬁve life skills that promote emotional wellbeing (as noted in our previous lesson, Creating and Implementing
School-Wide Expectations). Let's brieﬂy review these ﬁve core competencies (Weissberg et al., 2015). Click on each marker for
details.






One's ability to understand and recognize own's emotions, beliefs, and values as well as how they influence behavior and interactions with
others. It involves being able to accurately assess one's own strengths and limitations, and having a clear understanding of one's own
emotions, including how they are expressed and managed. 
Self-awareness helps students to develop a sense of self and to recognize how their thoughts and behaviors affect others. It is a key
component in developing healthy relationships and making responsible decisions. 

One's ability to make thoughtful and informed choices that promote positive outcomes for oneself and others. It involves considering the
well-being of oneself and others, identifying and evaluating options, and making decisions that align with one's values and goals. 
Responsible decision making also includes understanding and accepting the consequences of one's actions and taking steps to make amends
or learn from mistakes. Individuals who possess strong responsible decision-making skills are better equipped to navigate complex
situations, make ethical choices, and contribute positively to their communities. 

One's abilities necessary to establish and maintain positive and healthy relationships with others. 
These skills include effective communication, active listening, cooperation, and conflict resolution. Relationship skills also involve empathy,
perspective-taking, and the ability to recognize and appreciate diversity. 
Individuals who possess strong relationship skills are better equipped to collaborate and work effectively with others, build positive
relationships, and resolve conflicts in a constructive manner. 

One's ability to understand and empathize with the emotions, perspectives, and experiences of others. It involves being aware of social norms
and customs, as well as cultural differences and diversity. Social awareness also includes the ability to recognize and respond appropriately to
social cues and to communicate effectively with others. 
Social-awareness helps students to develop empathy, compassion, and a sense of social responsibility. Socially aware individuals are better
equipped to navigate diverse social situations, build positive relationships, and contribute positively to their communities.  
 

One's ability to manage and regulate emotions, thoughts, and behaviors  in a constructive and positive way. It involves setting and working
towards goals, managing stress and anxiety, practicing self-discipline, and making responsible decisions. 
Self-management helps students to develop the skills needed to navigate challenging situations and to achieve personal and academic
success. 
Together, these PHW competencies result in short- and long-term beneﬁts for students including strengthening students'
academics, social behaviors, and relationships while decreasing problem behaviors and distress (Joned & Kahn, 2017). 

MHL and PHW Together in the Classroom
If you’re thinking that MHL and PHW seem to overlap, you’re right! Review the Venn diagram below to see how MHL and PHW are
both similar and distinct.
Venn diagram  illustrating components of PHW and MHL practices

Proven Impact
MHL and PHW programs can have long-term beneﬁts for students by providing them with the skills and tools they need to
navigate challenges and thrive in their personal and professional lives. For example, according to a study of the impact of these
classroom intervention programs on students over a 20-year period, were associated with signiﬁcant improvements in students'
academic performance, employment outcomes, and mental health (Jones et al., 2015). The research basis for social learning and
emotional learning is extensive and impressive (Gueldner, et al., 2020). Scroll through the research ﬁndings below to see the
consistency of positive outcomes when MHL and PHW programs are implemented in the classroom.
“…better social, emotional and behavioral skills, better attendance, fewer dropout rates, better student
attitudes, many outcomes lasting long after programming was implemented”
- Payton et al., 2008
“… enhanced teacher-student relationships, which have been associated with better academic outcomes,
fewer behavioral problems, and improved social and emotional wellbeing”
- Jennings and Greenberg, 2009
“… positive outcomes in social, emotional and behavioral skills”
- Durlak et al., 2011
“…better social emotional skills and prosocial behaviors”
- Sklad, Diekstra, Ritter, Ben, and Gravesteijn, 2012
“… positive social and emotional skills, behaviors, academic outcomes, attitudes toward self and others,
reduced risk of emotional problems, drug use, and antisocial behaviors”
- Taylor, Oberle, Durlak, and Weissberg, 2017
“...academic performance, well-being, and perceptions of school safety all improved”
- Cipriano et al., 2023
As the research shows, MHL and PHW interventions equip students with valuable skills and knowledge that not only support their
mental health but also enhance their social interactions, academic success, and contribute to better student outcomes! 
Implementing MHL and PHW programs within the classroom is one of the most necessary components of integrating behavioral
and mental health supports within the MTSS framework. 
These programs lead to a stronger sense of belonging, and a more supportive environment for learning and positive behaviors.    


MHL and PHW across Tiers
Bridging Tier 1 and Tier 2 Supports
It's a common misconception that MHL and PHW programs are only Tier 1 practices. Let's explore how they operate across Tiers 1
and 2! First, let's clarify the distinctions between Tier 1 and Tier 2  and then explore the concept of layering tiered interventions. 


Tier 1
As you know, at the foundation of MHL and PHW lies Tier 1 programming. This encompasses universal strategies and practices
that are integrated into the overall classroom and school culture. Just as a solid foundation is essential for any structure, Tier 1
programming establishes a supportive and stigma-free atmosphere where mental health is openly discussed and valued. 
In Tier 1, students receive basic education about mental health awareness, emotional regulation, stress management, and
resilience building. Teachers might integrate discussions about emotions, coping mechanisms, and self-care into regular class
activities. This ensures that all students, regardless of their individual needs, gain a foundational understanding of mental health. 


Tier 2
As the next level of support, Tier 2 programming focuses on targeted interventions for students who may need additional
assistance beyond universal strategies.  
In Tier 2, educators identify students who might be at risk for more severe emotional or behavioral di culties. These students
receive more specialized support. These interventions aim to build on the foundational MHL and PHW programs of Tier 1 by
providing students with more personalized tools to manage their emotions, cope with stressors, and navigate challenges. These
interventions are often in the form of small group sessions or workshops and individualized support to help students apply the
skills they learn in real-life situations.   
The beauty of Tier 2 programming is that it doesn't isolate students; rather, it o ers them a temporary bridge of support to help
them overcome obstacles. This level of intervention aims to prevent the escalation of issues and ensures that students are
equipped with the skills to beneﬁt from the universal strategies in Tier 1. 


Layering Tiered Interventions
In essence, Tier 1 and Tier 2 programming work in tandem, ensuring that all students have access to essential knowledge about
mental health while providing targeted support to those who need it. In other words, Tier 1 doesn't stop, Tier 2 is an added layer for
those who may require more support. This layered approach acknowledges the diverse needs of students and fosters a holistic
culture of wellbeing within the educational setting. Just as a bridge unites two points, these tiers bridge the gap between awareness
and intervention, ultimately promoting mental health, emotional intelligence, and resilience among students. 
 The MTSS layered continuum of supports is designed to be data-driven and ﬂexible, ensuring that all students receive appropriate
support in understanding and managing their mental health.
Thus far, you learned that classroom MHL and PHW programs are designed to help students develop the skills they need to
manage their emotions, build positive relationships, and make responsible decisions and how these supports ﬁt into the MTSS
framework.  
But when is it an ideal time to introduce MHL and PHW into the classroom? The answer is now.
And here is why.

Let’s look at data provided by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Click through the markers below.




ADHD, anxiety problems, behavior problems, and depression are the most commonly diagnosed mental disorders in children. 

In 2016, 9.4% of children aged 3-17 years were diagnosed with anxiety. 
Of those, 37.9% also had behavior problems and 32.3% had depression. 

Among adolescents aged 12-17 years in 2018-2019 reporting on the past year, 
15.1% had a major depressive episode
18.8% seriously considered attempting suicide
15.7% made a suicide plan
8.9% attempted suicide
These data emphasize that it is essential for schools to prioritize MHL and PHW programs and make them a part of their overall
curriculum. Therefore, it is now time for your students to acquire MHL and PHW skills to succeed in the classroom and in their
lives. So, let's take a look at evidence-based practices that can support the students requiring Tier 2 interventions.


Developing Student MHL and PHW Skills


Evidence-based Programs for the Classroom
As you learned in prior courses, programs or practices implemented within the MTSS framework are evidence-based.
Interventions should be implemented based on the student data and with ﬁdelity to produce the desired outcomes. 
Prioritizing evidence-based practices ensures that the strategies being used are backed by research and have been
shown to have a positive impact on student wellbeing.  
The goal of Tier 2 interventions is to provide supplementary support in the classroom for students’ social, emotional, and
behavioral needs (e.g., students who are demonstrating signs of risk including multiple, o ce discipline referrals, low enrollment,
or poor task completion) with e cient and targeted interventions (Bruhn, et al., 2020).   
What is important to remember about Tier 2 interventions is that they need to be continuously available and easily accessible,
meaning that students do not have to wait for interventions when they need them the most (Mitchell et al., 2015). 
Let’s look at some of the evidence-based MHL and PHW programs. Click through the markers to read about each one.














PATHS
Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies (PATHS) is a curriculum designed for students in pre-kindergarten through sixth grade that
focuses on social and emotional learning, including skills related to self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills,
and responsible decision-making. The program includes scripted lessons, videos, and other resources for teachers to use in the classroom.
The program has been shown to improve students' social-emotional skills and academic performance. (Domitrovich et al., 2010).


Teacher-Child Interaction Training (TCIT))
Designed to improve teacher-child interactions and reduce behavior problems in young children. The program focuses on promoting
positive teacher-child relationships, building positive interactions, and using effective behavior management strategies. 
The TCIT program involves a series of training sessions for teachers, which includes classroom observations, feedback, coaching, and
practice opportunities. During the training, teachers learn how to establish positive relationships with children, increase positive
reinforcement and praise, and use effective strategies to manage challenging behaviors. 


Tootling
Promotes positive behavior among students. The intervention involves having students write positive notes about their peers when they
observe them engaging in appropriate behavior. The notes are then shared with the class as a way to recognize and reinforce positive
behavior. 
The tootling intervention is based on the principles of positive reinforcement and social learning theory. The goal of the intervention is to
create a positive classroom climate and to increase pro-social behavior among students (Skinner et al., 2000). 


Supporting Early Adolescent Learning and Social Support (SEALS)
Designed to promote academic success and social and emotional development among early adolescents in middle school. The program aims
to create a positive and supportive school environment that promotes engagement, positive relationships, and academic achievement. 
The SEALS program includes several components, such as professional development for teachers, a student advisory program, parent
engagement, and community involvement. The program is based on research on adolescent development, social support, and school-based
interventions (Catalano, et al., 2004). 


First Step to Success
Aims to improve academic and social outcomes for children who are at risk for developing behavior problems. The program is designed for
children in grades K-3 and focuses on early intervention to promote positive behavior and academic success. The First Step to Success
program is based on a collaborative model that involves teachers, parents, and the child. The program includes several components, such as
parent training, classroom behavior management, and individualized coaching for students (Walker et al., 2014).


Classroom SCERTS (Social Communication, Emotional Regulation, Transactional Support)
Aims to promote social communication and emotional regulation skills for students with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).
The program was developed by a team of researchers at the University of North Carolina and is based on the SCERTS model, which
emphasizes a comprehensive, team-based approach to supporting children with ASD. The Classroom SCERTS intervention is designed to be
implemented by teachers and other school staff within the classroom setting.
The program includes a range of strategies and activities that aim to support students with ASD in developing social communication and
emotional regulation skills. For example, teachers may use visual supports, social stories, and peer-mediated interventions to promote social
interaction and emotional regulation in the classroom (Stahmer et al., 2019).


Best in Class
Best in Class is designed for students in grades K-12 and is based on the five core competencies of SEL: self-awareness, self-management,
social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision-making. The program is specifically designed to address the needs of students
who display challenging behaviors in the classroom. Best in Class includes a range of activities and lessons that aim to build students' skills in
these five areas. For example, students may participate in activities that help them identify and manage their emotions, build positive
relationships with peers, and make responsible decisions (Bradshaw et al., 2015).


RULER
RULER is developed by the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence. The approach is based on the five skills of emotional intelligence:
Recognizing emotions, understanding emotions, labeling emotions, expressing emotions, and Regulating emotions (Brackett et al., 2012).  


Class-Wide Function Related Intervention Teams (CW-FIT)
TCW-FIT (Kamps et al., 2011) functions as an interdependent group contingency with an embedded token economy. Components of CW-FIT
are: 
-teaching clear behavioral expectations 
-dividing the class into teams 
-awarding teams if they are meeting expectations, at the end of brief sessions (e.g., 3–5 min) 
-providing a reward to all teams who meet a pre-determined point goal by the end of the class period.  
CW-FIT is based on the premise that problematic behaviors are functional, meaning they serve a purpose for the student, and that identifying
and addressing the function of these behaviors can lead to more positive behavior in the classroom (Conry et al., 2018). 


Good Behavior Game
The Good Behavior Game is an evidence-based classroom management strategy that focuses on promoting positive behavior in the
classroom. The game involves dividing students into teams and awarding points for positive behavior, such as staying on task and treating
others with respect.


MindUP
MindUP is a curriculum developed by the Hawn Foundation that focuses on teaching mindfulness and social-emotional learning to students
in kindergarten through eighth grade. The program includes lessons on the brain and its functions, mindfulness practices, and social-
emotional skills such as empathy, gratitude, and optimism. The program has been shown to improve students' social-emotional skills and
reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression. (Schonert-Reichl et al., 2015).


Second Step
Second Step is a curriculum designed for students in kindergarten through eighth grade that focuses on social-emotional learning, including
skills related to empathy, emotion management, problem-solving, and responsible decision-making. The program includes scripted lessons,
videos, and other resources for teachers to use in the classroom. The program has been shown to improve students' social and emotional
skills and academic performance. (Elias et al., 2015).
With all these options, you may be wondering how you can choose the best programs for your classroom. 
Here are some questions to consider:
Is this MHL or PHW program designed for elementary school, for middle school, or is it meant for high school
students?
Does research show that this MHL and PHW program works?
Does this MHL and PHW program focus on areas that are relevant to your classroom? 
If you are looking for a new MHL or PHW program to implement. In the PDF below, we provide links to each of the programs listed
in the graphic above. Download the PDF document below.
MHL and SEL Program Resources.pdf
212.8 KB
Here is an example of one of the evidenced-based strategies in action. Tootling! Let's go through a scenario to practice how Mrs.
Howes, a ﬁrst-grade teacher, implemented Tootling practices in her classroom. 
Tootling Practice in the Classroom
Let's illustrate how the practice of Tootling can be used in the classroom!
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 1
Continue 
 Next Slide
Mrs. Howes needs help!
Mrs. Howes has noticed that her students are starting to tattle on each other and
become jealous when she compliments certain students. She decides to get help
from Mr. Kim, the school psychologist!
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 2
Continue 
 Next Slide
Mr. Kim, I recognize that my students are tattling on each
other and getting jealous when I complement some
students. What can I do?
1
2
Why don't you try Tootling practice? It is a great way
to encourage positive behavior and help students
focus on the good things!
You don't really need to do anything, they are ﬁrst
graders, it will get better in time!
Scene 1 Slide 3


Best Practices


Putting MHL and PHW Programs into place
As discussed earlier, evidence-based Tier 2 support is highly e ective and practical for schoolwide and classroom-level
implementation (e.g., Rutherford et al., 2004). 
Incorporating MHL and PHW programs into regular class activities have been shown to be e ective in improving classroom
behavior and decreasing misbehavior. 
But what are the best practices for e ectively implementing these interventions to maximize e ciency? Read through the list
below for details and resources.

Fidelity of Implementation –
To ensure the successful implementation of MHL and PHW programs, ﬁdelity of implementation is essential. 
There are a few things that you can do to ensure ﬁdelity:
Develop clear guidelines for implementing MHL and PHW programs, including speciﬁc goals, activities, and expected
outcomes.
Establish regular check-ins or observations to ensure that teachers are implementing the program as intended.
Provide ongoing support to teachers and sta , including coaching and feedback, to help them improve their implementation
over time.
The Schoolwide Implementation Framework (SWIFT) provides a comprehensive approach to implementing evidence-based
practices in schools, including MHL and PHW programs. It includes tools for assessing the ﬁdelity of implementation and addressing
implementation barriers. Visit SWIFT for more information.
You can also use the National Implementation Research Network as it provides resources and tools for implementing evidence-based
programs with ﬁdelity: NIRN.

Training for Teachers and Staff –
To e ectively implement classroom-wide MHL and PHW programs for Tier 2 support, it is important to provide targeted training
for teachers and sta . Here are a few things that you can do: 
Provide initial and ongoing training to teachers and sta  on MHL and PHW topics. This could include training on how to 
identify signs of mental health concerns
provide emotional support to students
implement strategies for creating a positive classroom environment that promotes well-being.
Encourage teachers and sta  to participate in regular self-care practices, as this can help them model healthy behaviors for
students.
Consider partnering with mental health professionals to provide specialized training or consultation to teachers and sta .
The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) o ers mental health education programs for teachers and sta , including the
"Ending the Silence" program, which focuses on educating school communities about mental health. 
The Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning (CASEL) provides resources for professional development on SEL
for teachers and school leaders.  Click on the link to learn more: CASEL.
The National Child Traumatic Stress Network (NCTSN) provides resources for trauma-informed care training for teachers and
school sta , which can be particularly important for Tier 2 interventions. Click on this link to further review these resources: NCTSN. 
The National Center for School Mental Health provides training and technical assistance to school-based mental health
professionals, as well as resources for educators: SMH.

Integration into the Curriculum –
Tier 2 MHL and PHW programs can be integrated into the curriculum to ensure that they can be targeted to the students in need of
this level of support. You can: 
Identify opportunities to integrate MHL and PHW content into existing curriculum areas, such as English
Language Arts or Health classes.
Provide resources and lesson plans that integrate mental health and PHW concepts for teachers to use in
their classes.
Consider adopting a schoolwide theme or focus, such as “kindness” or “self-care” that promotes mental
health and PHW.
The MHL Curriculum Resource provides evidence-based curricula for mental health literacy education that can be integrated into
various subjects, such as health, science, and social studies. Here is a guide that is provided by Mental Health Literacy. Click here to
explore: MHL.
Mental Health instruction also provides great resources for implementing MHL curricula. Visit Implementation. 

Active Parent and Community Involvement –
Parent and community involvement can enhance the e ectiveness of Tier 2 MHL  and PHW programs. To promote parent and
community involvement, you can:
Engage parents and community members in the implementation of MHL and PHW programs through activities, such as
workshops or events that promote parent-child communication or mental health literacy.
Seek input and feedback from parents and community members on the design and implementation of MHL and PHW
programs.
Develop partnerships with local mental health providers or community organizations to provide additional support and
resources to students and families.
The National Parent Teacher Association (PTA) provides resources for engaging families in their child's education, including Tier 2
MHL and SEL programs. You can share these resources with your student's parents and caregivers. To learn more, visit PTA. 
The Parent and Family Resources section of the CASEL website provides tips for engaging families in SEL: CASEL.
Ongoing Monitoring and Evaluation –

Ongoing monitoring and evaluation are essential to ensure that Tier 2 mental health literacy and PHW programs are e ective and
sustainable. In monitoring and evaluating current programs, you can:
Establish a system for monitoring and evaluating the e ectiveness of MHL and PHW programs, including regular data
collection and analysis.
Use data to make adjustments to the program over time, based on what is working and what is not.
Communicate results and progress to teachers.
The School Health Assessment and Performance Evaluation (SHAPE) system provides a framework for assessing and improving
school health programs, including MHL and SEL programs: SHAPE.

In addition to best practices, let’s review some speci c strategies to use when
implementing MHL and PHW programs. Flip through the  ash cards to learn
more!
Creating a positive classroom climate is
important for all students, especially those
who may be struggling with mental health
concerns.  
Creating a positive classroom climate can
include:
 Providing a welcoming and inclusive
environment, using positive
reinforcement, and building positive
relationships with students
Developing clear classroom rules and
expectations, and communicating them
consistently to students
1 of 5
2 of 5
Engaging students in discussion and
re ection can promote self-awareness,
empathy, and social awareness. For Tier 2
support, it can also help students identify and
Providing opportunities for students to
process their feelings and develop coping
practice and reinforce social and emotional
skills. You can incorporate student-led
skills is crucial for effective Tier 2 support.
discussion in the classroom by: 
This can include role-playing, group activities,
and real-world application of skills.  You can
Providing opportunities for students to
also include the following activities:
share their thoughts, opinions, and
feelings in a safe and non-judgmental
Providing explicit instruction on speci c
environment
PHW skills, such as empathy, self-
regulation, and problem-solving
Using open-ended questions to
Using real-life scenarios or case studies to
help students practice applying these
skills
3 of 5
4 of 5
Incorporating mindfulness and relaxation
techniques can help promote self-regulation,
stress reduction, and overall mental
wellbeing. For Tier 2 support, it can also
provide coping skills and strategies for
managing anxiety and other mental health
concerns. Consider:
Teaching students mindfulness
techniques, such as deep breathing and
body scan exercises, to help them regulate
their emotions and reduce stress
Incorporating brief mindfulness exercises
into daily routines, such as at the
Encouraging peer support and collaboration
can promote social and emotional wellbeing,
5 of 5
and help build a sense of community and
belonging. For Tier 2 support, it can also
provide opportunities for students to connect
Great work!


Let's review the lesson.
Overall, implementing Tier 2 MHL and PHW supports within the classroom can help enhance the mental health and wellbeing of
students who are not responding to Tier 1, while also addressing speciﬁc behavior and academic challenges. By creating a positive
school culture and equipping teachers and sta  with resources, these programs can help promote student success and
ﬂourishing. 
Let’s recap the importance of implementing Tier 2 MHL and PHW programs in the classroom: 
-Supports Mental Health and Wellbeing: These programs can provide students with the knowledge, skills, and
resources they need to manage their mental health and wellbeing. By promoting self-awareness, self-regulation,
and healthy coping strategies, these programs can help prevent and address mental health concerns. 
-Addresses Student Behavior and Academic Challenges: Classroom MHL and PHW interventions can provide
targeted support for students who may be struggling with behavior or academic challenges. By helping students
develop social and emotional skills, these programs can improve classroom behavior and academic performance. 
-Promotes Positive School Culture: By creating a positive and inclusive classroom environment, these programs
can promote a positive school culture and enhance students' sense of belonging and connection to their school. 
-Equips Teachers and Sta  with Resources: Schools o ering MHL and PHW curriculum provide teachers and sta 
with the tools and resources they need to support student mental health and wellbeing. This can include training
and professional development opportunities, as well as access to evidence-based resources and strategies to use
in the classroom.
Before you go!
As a valuable conclusion to this lesson, we have prepared two comprehensive PDF
documents for you! One includes all the essential links covered throughout this
course, and the other incorporates assets meticulously crafted by our dedicated
SBHA team.
Bridging Supports with Tier 2 assets created by the SBHA.pdf
124 KB
Bridging Supports with Tier 2 lesson links.pdf
147.3 KB
Go ahead and get connected with us on social media: Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook.
The Academy also encourages greater involvement with the broader Southeastern School Behavioral Health Community to
increase connections throughout the Southeast and the nation. We are all in this together!
Congratulations! 
You have completed the Bridging Supports with Tier 2 course. Great work! 
EXIT COURSE





##### 
*****
Growing Your Tier 3 Supports - 1.1
Welcome to Growing Your Tier 3 Supports  In this course, you will learn about the
interventions, best practices, and implementation of Tier 3 of Multi-tiered System
of Supports (MTSS), with a focus on supporting behavioral and mental health. Like
seeds planted in a garden, growing supports at Tier 3 creates a beautiful garden
where everyone is ﬂourishing. Let's get started
Tier 3 Overview
Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Tier 3 Overview
Outcomes: 

1. Analyze the role of Tier 3 support and its value in the school setting
2. Explain the process of student identiﬁcation for Tier 3 mental health supports
3. Recognize the range of signs and symptoms indicating common needs for Tier 3
support
Tier 3
The Top of the MTSS Pyramid 

The Tier 3 level of MTSS is at the top of the pyramid and indicates the highest level of support
available. When using Tier 3 support for mental health, this often means supporting students
with treatment and intervention for mental or behavioral health disorders. Tier 3 is like a garden
with a variety of supports available; the more Tier 3 supports grow, the more everyone in the
school can beneﬁt
Let's check in with some School Behavioral Health
leaders sharing their perspectives on Tier 3 and hear
how key features of MTSS grow a positive mental health
culture in your schools
If you are engaging with the Tier 3 course, there are a variety of roles you may have in or
adjacent to the school setting. You might be:
A school psychologist or counselor employed by a school or district
A social worker employed by the school or other community organizations
A private practice clinician, such as a Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC) or
Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist (LMFT), considering partnering with
schools to provide services
An educator interested in learning more about how to support youth with mental
health needs
A behavior interventionist employed by a school or in private practice
An administrator or school leader looking to incorporate mental health into
existing systems
An experienced mental health clinician looking to learn more about MTSS
Together, we can all help grow our garden of supports and improve youth mental health. Let's
get started
Great things are done by a series of small things brought
together.
Vincent Van Gogh
If you would like more in-depth information on MTSS and its role in supporting students,
families, and educators, check out the other SBHA courses below.
All Hands On Deck
Core MTSS
Building the Foundation with Tier 1
Bridging Supports with Tier 2
Tier 3 and MTSS 

Where Tier 3 Fits in the MTSS Framework
Core Principles of MTSS 

Supporting youth at the Tier 3 level begins with a strong Multi-tiered System of Supports
(MTSS). MTSS is a framework approach that includes a tiered approach to support students
with academic, behavior, and mental health. MTSS includes three tiers of support based on the
level of intensity needed.
Click through the image below for a review of each tier.
Tier 1 

Tier 1 is the universal level of support, meaning that all students are involved. The main goals of Tier 1
support are to:
Provide support for all students
Proactively prevent problems
Some examples of Tier 1 supports are:
School climate enhancement
Schoolwide behavioral expectations
Universal curriculum
When functioning well, Tier 1 ideally meets the needs of around 80% of students.
Tier 2 

Tier 2 involves supplemental and targeted interventions for some students. Goals of Tier 2 support are:
Support select students
Proactively respond to needs before they become greater
Some examples of Tier 2 supports include:
Mentoring programs
Small group instruction
Ideally, Tier 2 supports 10-15% of students.
Tier 3 

At the Tier 3 level, support is given for a few students at the most intensive level, ideally supporting 5-10%
of students. Some goals of Tier 3 support include:
Support students with mental health concerns or challenges
Enable all students to succeed
Some examples of Tier 3 support are:
Individual counseling
Behavior intervention plans
Tier 3 is the main focus of this lesson and this course. Keep going for more information
A well-functioning MTSS proactively identiﬁes needs and matches resources to intentionally
respond to all students. Mental health is not just a focus at Tier 3, but rather a component of the
culture of support across all tiers. As a champion for mental health and positive health and
wellbeing in your buildings, you can inform strategies across all tiers, planting seeds to nurture
a positive and supportive culture in your buildings for all students.
MTSS also includes the following core practices that apply across all tiers:
Data-informed decision making
Team-based approach
Screening
Cultural humility
Family engagement
Let's take a look at each of these in the flashcards below.  ashcards below.
Data-informed decision making 

Data-informed decision making
is the process of using data as a
guide and resource in
determining which students
receive which supports. Data
can come from a variety of
sources: grades, test scores,
attendance records,
assessments, information from
families, teachers observations,
MTSS involves a team-based
approach. MTSS teams include
a diverse range of
professionals, including:
Screening 

MTSS uses screening
assessments to proactively
general and special
identify concerns. Screening is
education teachers
often done for hearing/vision,
school administrators
reading, math, and social,
emotional, and behavioral skills.
mental health clinicians
Screening is a proactive
approach that identifies
students who may be at
elevated risk for outcomes,
Cultural Humility 

Cultural humility is a central
value to core MTSS. Cultural
humility involves valuing and
respecting the beliefs of all
community members. This
includes self-reflection on one's
own perspective and how that
impacts interactions with
others, open-mindedness to
the perspectives of others, and
Family engagement 

Family engagement is also
central to MTSS. Interacting
and collaborating with families
enables their voices to be heard
and supports a stronger
learning environment for
everyone. Strong school-
family-community partnerships
involve two-way and frequent
communication mutual trust
While all of this might sound great to you, you might also be wondering why support youth
mental health through MTSS and in the school setting. After all, mental health providers can
provide care in many settings, such as doctor's offices, hospitals, private practices, or
community organizations. However, there are many advantages to school-based care that is
provided through an MTSS framework. Read more about the advantages of youth accessing
mental health care through schools that practice MTSS in the list below.
Accessibility: 

Research supports the idea that youth are much more likely to access
mental health care in the school setting than in other settings; of students who
access mental health care, 80% do so in schools (National Association for School
Psychologists, 2022). Schools can make meeting logistically simpler than other
settings, where youth would need transportation to an additional office or
treatment center. Schools are also a more familiar environment which can make
students more comfortable.
Team Approaches:

The team-based approach of MTSS allows for a diverse range of
professionals to interact. These diverse perspectives enhance collaboration in
treatment planning and implementation and provide a group of caring personnel to
support youth goals.
Daily interactions: 

Students are in school every day, which can increase the
frequency that providers are able to interact with students, either in or out of
sessions. Opportunities to observe students in the classroom can also be helpful.
Availability of data: 
 
The school setting has many sources of data available for use in
determining mental health needs. Attendance, grades, test scores, assessments
from teachers and families, and other data sources are readily available.
Integration of resources: 

Resources are integrated across multiple tiers of support.
Students do not have to be receiving individual counseling, for example, to access
support for anxiety: schools practicing MTSS also have resources available for
anxiety at the universal (Tier 1) and supplemental (Tier 2) levels, such as curriculum
about identifying and managing anxiety or small group support.
With these core principles and advantages in mind, let's look more in-depth at the focus of this
lesson: Tier 3
Tier 3 

As mentioned previously, Tier 3 is the most intensive level of support and addresses mental
health concerns for students who are experiencing signiﬁcant challenges that may not be
responding to Tier 1 and Tier 2 systems of support. There is a wide range of needs that can be
met with Tier 3 support. Some students may be experiencing a crisis, have persistent behavior
challenges, or have a mental health diagnosis as a part of a school-based evaluation or from a
doctor or mental health service provider.
Some Tier 3 mental health interventions may look similar to those provided at Tier 2, but they
will differ due to the use of:
Extensive or more individualized assessment, since more information is needed for
intervention planning
Higher intensity and frequency of implementation
More individualized service provisions
Service from a mental health practitioner with knowledge and expertise in more
specialized, evidence-based interventions
Review the image below for examples of Tier 3
interventions. Click to enlarge.
Examples of Tier 3 Interventions
When to Utilize Tier 3 Services 

It may be challenging to determine when Tier 3 is needed compared to needs at Tier 1 or Tier 2.
There are several reasons that a student may be identiﬁed as needing Tier 3 support. Tier 3 level
intervention may be recommended when a student is already receiving Tier 2 services but these
strategies are not enough to support the student's needs, the student may have a diagnosed
mental health disorder, or the student may be in crisis. Teachers, family members, and other
adults may also observe behaviors that indicate concern. Some common concerns that may
indicate the need for Tier 3 services are listed in the diagram below.
Click on the image for a larger view.
Examples of externalizing and internalizing behaviors
Students can be connected to Tier 3 through requests for assistance (also sometimes called
referrals). Generally, a request for assistance should be made when a student is presenting with
chronic and severe internalizing/externalizing behaviors in the classroom that are signiﬁcantly
impeding their academic progress. Review the steps below for more information about
requesting assistance.
Request for Assistance Steps
Step 1: Identification   

There are multiple pathways to identiﬁcation of students in need of Tier 3 support. With a strong
MTSS system in place, students might be identiﬁed through Tier 1 universal screening or through
progress monitoring of Tier 2 interventions.
For example, a student has presented with chronic and severe externalizing behaviors in the
classroom, including calling out while others are speaking, leaving the classroom without
permission, wandering the school, and becoming physically aggressive (i.e., throwing items,
turning over desks and chairs) when presented with challenging academic tasks. These behaviors
impede the learning of the student, as well as their classmates. The family has expressed concern
about similar behaviors at home during homework time. Although Tier 2 services in the form of
Check In/Check Out have been implemented, the teacher's observations of the student in class
and documentation of the student's progress indicate the need for a referral for Tier 3 supports. 
Students may also be directly connected to Tier 3 support through being recommended by a
teacher or parent because of ongoing social, emotional, and behavioral issues (e.g., learning
issues, office discipline referrals, suspension, time out of instruction, etc.). When a family
provides the school with documentation of a diagnosis from a community mental health
professional, the MTSS team convenes to review the information and determine next steps.
Step 2: Request for Assistance   

Once needs have been identiﬁed, a request for assistance can be made. This process may look
different for each district, but teams should explore data for the individual student presenting
concerns. Teams can look for what information is already available, such as:
an Individualized Educational Plan (IEP)
previous assessment/screening records (Tier 1 universal screenings or Tier 2 progress
monitoring) 
educator/professional observation data records
academic records
attendance records 
In other words, school teams should utilize all data sources to determine a student s need for Tier
3 support: individual diagnostic information, progress monitoring data, and the broader relevant
pieces of information that were mentioned above (e.g., low attendance, academic struggle).
Information from the family is extremely important along with relevant observations from
different sources such as art and music teachers, coaches, mentors, etc.
Step 3: Conduct Needs Assessment   
 
Step 3 is not so much a step as it is a process. The assessment process begins with the exploration
of student information and previous records. The process then continues with the use of formal
and informal assessment tools, among other necessary components. 
One of the core features of Tier 3 is the use of screening and assessment tools. MTSS teams
typically have a variety of screening data available. This is a great place to start  Once teams
review existing information, the discussion can turn to what questions need to be answered and
how to go about gathering that information. Classroom or school observations, student and
caregiver interviews, teacher input, and additional academic screenings are examples.
If the team has concerns about academic, behavioral, or social/emotional issues that have a
signiﬁcant educational impact for the student, they may refer the student to the school s
intervention team. The intervention team would review the data, and may decide to refer the
student for an IDEA evaluation or a 504 evaluation. Recall that the decision to refer for an IDEA or
504 evaluation comes down to the team s thoughts about the student requiring specialized
instruction (IDEA) or only accommodations (504). Both evaluation processes require written
consent from the parent or guardian to proceed.
Before moving on with this lesson, let's review a few
common myths about when to utilize Tier 3 intervention
services.
It is a myth that students must
have Tier 2 supports in place
before moving into Tier 3. A
student may have already been
receiving Tier 2 services and
showed a significant need for
the addition of Tier 3 supports,
but that is not always the case.
In some cases, students can be
referred directly for Tier 3
It is a common misconception
that to receive Tier 3
interventions, a student must
qualify for special education
services. However, any student
can receive Tier 3 mental health
interventions if there is an
identi ed need, regardless of
whether they also receive
special education services. For
Another myth is that when a
student receives Tier 3
supports, they stop receiving
Tier 2 supports. This isn't true
These supports may continue
as appropriate with a student
who is also receiving intensive
one-on-one Tier 3 services. For
example, a student with
depression may continue
Mental Health Needs in the School Setting 

An Overview of Common Challenges
There is a great need for support at the Tier 3 level. Initially, in earlier MTSS framework
development, it was reported that about 5% of students will need Tier 3 support. However,
ongoing research suggests that the impact of the pandemic and current societal issues have
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced that number. Because of the increase in mental health concerns, the
pandemic, and other societal changes, some estimates put the number of students needing Tier
3 support at up to 20%.
Impact of the Pandemic 

Before the pandemic, a large number of students had mental health needs. Some key statistics
include:
9.8% of youth 3-17 years old have been diagnosed with attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder (Bitsko et al., 2019)
9.4% of youth 3-17 years old have been diagnosed with an anxiety disorder (Bitsko
et al., 2019)
20.9% of youth 12-17 years old have experienced a major depressive episode at
some point in their life
36.7% of high school students have reported feeling persistently sad or hopeless,
and 18.8% have seriously considered attempting suicide
While this was already a large need, the pandemic and the resulting years have also increased
the rate of mental health needs. To explore the impact of the pandemic on youth mental health,
check out the link below.
How the pandemic has impacted teen mental health
3 in 4 parents say COVID-19 has had a negative impact on their teens being able
to interact with friends. 1 in 3 teen girls and 1 in 5 teen boys have experienced
new or worsening anxiety since March 2020. Half of parents have relaxed family
rules to allow their teen more contact with friends.
READ MORE NATIONAL POLL ON CHILDREN'S HEALTH 
All of these factors contribute to the number of students who may need Tier 3 services in the
school setting. Let's break down what these needs are and look like. Previously, we mentioned
externalizing and internalizing behaviors. While any student can exhibit externalizing or
internalizing behaviors, these may indicate common mental health disorders. Common
externalizing disorders include:
Attention-deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 
Behavior and conduct disorders
Substance use disorders
Common internalizing disorders include:
Anxiety disorders
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD)
Depression
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Eating disorders
Let's take a look at how these concerns may show up in the classroom.
Externalizing Disorders
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

ADHD is reported as the most common mental health issue among children and teens in the US
(CDC, 2019). Let's expand or review your knowledge of ADHD and how it may look in the
classroom.
Attention-De cit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
ADHD by the Numbers 

ADHD affects an estimated 5& of all children globally.
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates the rate of
diagnosed ADHD in children has increased by approximately 5% every year since
2011.
According to a national survey of parents in the United States, the estimated
number of children aged 3 17 years ever diagnosed with ADHD, is 9.8% (CDC,
2019). That's approximately 6 million children.
South Carolina exceeds the national average with an estimated 13.8% of school-
aged children diagnosed with ADHD.
Types of ADHD 

There are three subcategories of ADHD, including:
ADHD, predominantly impulsive/hyperactive: This is the least common type.
The student will show signs of hyperactivity and the need to move constantly, as
well as displaying impulsive or disruptive behavior. They may not show signs of
getting distracted or being inattentive.
ADHD, predominantly inattentive: Students with this type of ADHD may not
exhibit signs of hyperactivity or impulsivity. The student may be quiet and
thoughtful but is very easily distracted and has difficulty concentrating.
ADHD, combined: This is the most common type of ADHD. The student will show
both impulsive and hyperactive behavior and struggle to maintain attention.
Comorbid Conditions 

Children and teens with ADHD are more likely to also be diagnosed with other
disorders:
Approximately 50% of children diagnosed with ADHD have a behavior or conduct
problem
3 in 10 children (33%) with ADHD have anxiety
7% of children and teens with ADHD also have depression 
ADHD Summary
With these numbers in mind, you can understand why students diagnosed with ADHD
represent some of the greatest need for Tier 3 mental health services within the
schools. 
Here is a short video scenario describing ADHD symptoms and the impact on a student's
performance.
ADHD: Signs, Symptoms, Solutions
ADHD: Signs, Symptoms, Solutions
Behavior & Conduct Disorders 

Behavior is a huge concern in the school setting, and mental health can have a large impact on
the way that students behave. Beyond normal misbehaviors, however, some mental health
conditions can cause long-lasting difficulties with behavior. In this section, we will examine
two behavior disorders: oppositional deﬁant disorder and conduct disorder.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD)
Most children display oppositional or deﬁant behaviors at one time or another.
Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder (ODD), however, goes beyond the occasional
argumentative, sometimes disobedient behaviors common among children and
teens. ODD involves a long-term pattern of angry, argumentative, and deﬁant
behaviors.
Some symptoms include:
Persistent angry and irritable mood: losing temper, easily annoyed, resentful
Argumentative: frequently argues with adults and authority ﬁgures
Refusal and deﬁance of requests being made
Blaming others for mistakes or failures
Resentful, spiteful, or vindictive thoughts and behavior
Symptoms of ODD often begin around preschool age and are usually present by early
teen years. Symptoms can be extremely disruptive, resulting in difficulties with
family or friendships, suspensions/expulsions from school, and difficulty
maintaining jobs in adolescence/adulthood. The exact causes of ODD are uncertain,
but it may be caused by a combination of genetic or environmental factors. Treatment
for this disorder involves family and individual therapy and skill-building for
behavior. Medications may also be used, especially with comorbid conditions such as
ADHD, anxiety, or depression.
Slide 2
Conduct Disorder 

Another behavior disorder impacting youth is Conduct Disorder (CD). CD involves a
consistent and long-term pattern of behaviors that harm others and difficulties with
empathy and rule-following. This disorder is related to antisocial personality
disorder (ASPD), which is diagnosed in adults. For some, CD in childhood becomes
ASPD in adulthood.
The four broad symptom groups of CD include:
Aggression: bullying, intimidating others, physically ﬁghting, harming animals,
or sexual violence
Destruction: setting ﬁre, vandalizing, or otherwise damaging property
Deceitfulness: lying, stealing, breaking into places
Violations of rules: absences from school, breaking rules set by parents,
teachers, or other authority ﬁgures
Untreated symptoms of conduct disorder can cause major disruptions to everyday life,
relationships with others, and impact academic progress in the school setting. Similar
to ODD, CD can be treated through individual, family, and group talk therapies and
skill-building.
Summary 

Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder and Conduct Disorder are both long-term patterns of
harmful or deﬁant behavior. These disorders both go beyond the occasional
misbehavior or rebellion that is typical of youth and may not respond to typical
methods of discipline. Treatment provided by a professional can help minimize
disruptions of these disorders to everyday life and often involves talk therapy with
individuals as well as parents and families.
Note: our team at the School Behavioral Health Academy recommend avoiding labeling
students with conduct disorder related to the highly pejorative implications of this label
(e.g., CD is closely associated with juvenile delinquency).
Substance Use Disorders
Another externalizing concern that is likely to be seen in the school setting, especially in
adolescents, is substance use. Many teens use substances, but not all have substance use
disorders.
Substance Use Disorders 

Slide 1
Substance Use Disorder (SUD) 
 
Many teens and adolescents begin experimenting with drugs and alcohol. While this
can be a health concern for any teen, this can become especially concerning for those
who develop substance use disorder (SUD). This disorder involves an inability to
control the use of a drug or substance to the extent that it causes impairment in
everyday life. SUD may also be called an addiction. Some examples of substances
associated with SUD include (American Psychiatric Association, 2020):
Alcohol
Tobacco/nicotine - through cigarettes or vaping
Marijuana or hallucinogens, such as LSD
Stimulants, such as cocaine or methamphetamine
Opioid pain killers, such as heroin or codeine (may become Opioid Use Disorder)
People with SUD often have other mental health concerns, such as anxiety or
depression. This may be because there are common risk factors for developing both
conditions, but also because substance use can lead to the symptoms of these
conditions.
Slide 2
Signs of SUD in the School Setting 

Substance use disorder looks different depending on the substance being used and the
severity of the disorder. However, some general signs of substance use may include:
Strong cravings for alcohol, cigarettes, vaping, or other substances
Habituation to a substance - needing more of it to have the same effect
Frequently being drunk or high
Withdrawal when not using a substance
Hiding or selling drugs
Many youth with substance use disorder may hide the condition, especially from
parents or teachers, not only due to stigma for mental health, but also due to concerns
about getting in trouble. Some other signs, aside from seeing students using or
having substances, include:
Missing school
Lower performance in school
No longer seeing the same friends
No longer spending time on previously enjoyed activities
These symptoms could also indicate other mental health conditions, so it is essential
to connect students displaying these signs to a professional to assess their cause.
Summary 

Substance Use Disorder can be extremely disruptive to lives of youth experiencing
them. Intervening and providing support, whether through counseling, inpatient
treatment, or other means of assistance, can vastly improve outcomes for youth with
this condition.
Watch the video below for an overview of substance
use.
Teen Health: Substance Use and Abuse
Teen Health: Substance Use and Abuse
For in-depth information on substance use, particularly with regards to the opioid crisis
and how it impacts our communities, check out our supplemental module, "The Opioid and
Fentanyl Epidemic."
Internalizing Disorders 

Anxiety Disorders 

Anxiety is the second most diagnosed mental health issue among children and teens in the
United States, following ADHD. Click through the slides below to review or grow your
understanding of anxiety disorders
Anxiety
Slide 1
Anxiety by the Numbers 

Anxiety is the second most common mental disorder affecting children and teenagers.
Although the pandemic may have exacerbated mental health needs, current research
shows that anxiety among children and teens has been on the rise for some years.
According to the CDC (2019), 9.4% of children aged 3-17 years (approximately 5.8
million) had been diagnosed with anxiety from 2016-2019.
Slide 2
Types of Anxiety Disorders 

There are several major types of anxiety disorders:
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Panic Disorder
Speciﬁc phobia(s)
Separation Anxiety Disorder
Social Anxiety Disorder
It is imperative for teachers and schools to have a strong understanding of anxiety, in
all its forms, and how it works so that schools can provide effective support and
resources for struggling students.
Slide 3
Symptoms 

There are many types of anxiety disorders, but they all involve persistent, excessive
worrying and fear. Some symptoms include:
rumination and constant worrying about a variety of topics (generalized anxiety
disorder)
stomachaches, headaches, and other unexplained physical symptoms (common
in many anxiety disorders)
fear of judgement in social situations (social anxiety disorders)
intense fear and avoidance of speciﬁc objects, places, or situations (speciﬁc
phobias)
overwhelming fear resulting in rapid breathing, lightheadedness, sense of
impending doom (panic attacks)
signiﬁcant fear or distress when separated from loved ones (separation anxiety)
As you can see, anxiety disorders have a vast array of symptoms and presentations.
Let's look at how these may manifest in the classroom.
Slide 4
Classroom Indicators 

Symptoms of anxiety are not always clear or external, but there may be some signs.
Children with anxiety disorders might:
procrastinate or avoid classwork
make frequent trips to the nurse
stay home from school, arrive late, or leave early frequently
appear quiet and withdrawn
have a hard time making decisions (indecisiveness)
avoid certain situations, like speaking up in class
exhibit perfectionism
You may notice that the signs in this list are also present in students without anxiety
disorders. This is why it is so important to assess students through screeners or
standard assessments to determine the root cause of any presenting behaviors.
Summary 

Anxiety disorders are a broad category of mental health concerns that are extremely
common in youth. Anxiety can come with many symptoms, some of which may be
easier to spot than others. Connecting students to support early can help students
with these disorders tremendously
Take a moment to review this short video about the
impact of anxiety on student academic performance.
Impact of Anxiety on School Performance
Impact of Anxiety on School Performance
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 

Another common disorder experienced in youth is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), with
up to 3% of children having a diagnosis. The mean age of onset for pediatric OCD is between 9
and 11 for boys, and 11 and 13 for girls. While this disorder is common, it can be the most
unnoticed and overlooked as students with the disorder often go to great lengths to hide the
condition. Click through the slides below to learn more about it.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Slide 1
Definition 

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is one of the most commonly misunderstood
mental illnesses. OCD is characterized by intrusive, unwanted thoughts (obsessions)
and attempts to relieve these unwanted thoughts through repetitive routines and
rituals (compulsions). These thoughts and behaviors can cause signiﬁcant distress,
anxiety, shame, and guilt which interferes with socializing, academics, and overall
daily functioning.
Slide 2
Obsessions 
 
While OCD stereotypes involve someone who is clean and organized, this is far from
the reality of the condition. Obsessions and compulsions may involve cleanliness and
fear of contamination, but can also include:
Unwanted thoughts of violence
Fear of accidentally harming someone
Fear of having a certain disease
Perfectionism (fear of making a mistake)
Fear of contamination
These are some common obsessions; however, obsessions vary greatly and can
change topic over time.
Slide 3
Compulsions 

In OCD, obsessions are accompanied by compulsions. Some common compulsions
that may show up in the classroom include:
Telling, asking, or seeking reassurance
Rereading, rewriting, excessive erasing, or throwing paper out
Procrastination
Frequent trips to use the bathroom or see the nurse
Avoidance of certain places, people, situations, or objects
Adjusting desk, contents of desk, locker or backpack, or other items in the
classroom
Repeatedly doing the same thing (by number or a  just right  feeling)
While this list describes some common compulsions, there are many others, and they
may change and vary over time. Importantly, compulsions can also occur mentally
and not involve any external objects or obvious signs.
Summary 

Symptoms of OCD are not always obvious. There is a great deal of guilt and shame that
can come from OCD, so it is important to listen to students empathetically when
discussing this condition. Avoiding stereotypes (phrases like "You're so clean  You
must have OCD" or "I'm so OCD about having my house clean") is also important in
increasing awareness and understanding of this condition.
Depression 

Many children and teens have times when they are sad or down. Sadness is an expected part of
growing up. However, intense, excessive unhappiness may be a sign of depression. Click
through the slides below for more information and signs of depression.
Depression
Slide 1
Defining Depression 

Depression is an extremely common mood disorder that impacts people of all ages.
Among youth aged 12-17 in the United States, 15% reported having experienced at
least one major depressive episode in the past year (Mental Health America, 2022).
Depression is also prevalent in youth under 12, and it often goes untreated, making it
more likely to persist into adulthood.
Depression can manifest in different ways. It is characterized by persistent sadness
and low mood, but goes beyond this. Depression also causes hopelessness, low self-
esteem, guilt or shame, loss of interest in activities that were previously enjoyed, or
feeling emotionally numb. Depression can also lead to self-harm or suicidal thoughts
and actions.
Slide 2
Symptoms 

As an internalizing disorder, the symptoms of depression are not always obvious to
outside observers. Examples of behaviors that may indicate depression include:
Feeling sad, hopeless, or irritable a lot of the time
Not wanting to participate in usual activities
Tardiness, missing classes, or staying home from school
Showing changes in energy   being tired and sluggish or tense and restless a lot
of the time
Higher or lower appetite than usual
Signiﬁcant weight loss or weight gain
Sleeping more or less than usual
Having a hard time paying attention
Low self-esteem or being overly critical of themselves
Showing self-injury and self-destructive behavior
Thoughts of death, dying, suicide or suicide attempts
When looking for symptoms of depression, it is important to look for changes in
behavior. For example, a normal amount of energy and participation may vary from
student to student, but when there is a decrease in participation and an increase in
shyness/withdrawal, that may indicate concern.
Slide 3
Treating Depression 

Depression, while common and challenging, is also very treatable. Depression can be
treated with talk therapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), medication,
lifestyle changes (such as diet and exercise) or a combination of these. Intervening
early is key and can prevent progression of depressive symptoms, reduce the
likelihood of suicidal thoughts and behaviors, and improve wellbeing.
Summary 

Many youth will go through depression during their time in school. While this
condition can be challenging and isolating, there is hope and many effective
treatments are available. Providing intervention early and being a positive and
supportive presence can help youth recover from experiences with depression.
Watch the video below from the World Health
Organization (WHO) for a lived perspective of
depression and its impact on everyday life.
I had a black dog, his name was depression
I had a black dog, his name was depression
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Teddy bear covering eyes, surrounded by colorful blocks
Many children in school today are going through trauma of one sort or another. It is essential to
consider how trauma can impact a child s brain functioning. Trauma-induced changes to the
brain can result in varying degrees of cognitive impairment and emotional dysregulation that
can lead to severe problems, including difficulty with attention and focus, learning disabilities,
low self-esteem, and impaired social skills. Trauma can also lead to post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). Read more about PTSD below.
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
Slide 1
Defining PTSD 

Post-traumatic stress disorder is a very common mental health concern that is a long-
term response to a traumatic event. Some traumatic events that may cause PTSD are
adverse childhood experiences (ACEs). For more information about ACEs, keep going
with this lesson
Slide 2
Symptoms 

Symptoms of PTSD can vary from person to person and take many different forms.
Some symptoms are visible behaviors, but many are internal. Symptoms of PTSD in
youth include:
Difficulty sleeping, nightmares related to the traumatic event
difficulty sleeping, nightmares related to the traumatic eventff
Becoming upset and avoiding reminders of the event (places, people, or
situations)
Ongoing and persistent fear or sadness
Irritability or anger
Frequent memories/ﬂashbacks to the event, feeling as though it is still
happening
Being easily startled or frequently on high alert
Difficulty concentrating, being more withdrawn than usual
Guilt, shame, or low self-esteem
Symptoms of PTSD may also look like symptoms of anxiety, depression, or ADHD
(difficulty sleeping, concentrating, having persistent fear/worry/sadness, low self-
esteem, and more). However, with PTSD, these behaviors can be linked back to a
traumatizing event. Assessment by a qualiﬁed professional is essential in separating
PTSD from other mental health concerns.
Summary 

A large number of youth experience trauma and face  difficulties afterwards. Persistent
difficulties may indicate PTSD. It is important to monitor students for symptoms and
connect them to support as soon as possible. Treatment for PTSD may include
individual therapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, and/or medication to
manage symptoms. With the right support, resilience and recovery are possible.
PTSD may be related to students  adverse childhood experiences (ACEs). ACEs are potentially
traumatic events that happen before students reach the age of 18 and can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence
youth and adolescents' mental health, physical health, and overall well-being. ACEs cover
various childhood experiences including abuse, neglect, and household difficulties.
Importantly, not all students who have experienced ACEs or other trauma will develop PTSD, but
it does increase the risk of PTSD and other mental and physical health disorders.
Please visit the chart below to learn more about what is
included in each type of ACEs. Click to enlarge.
Table showing types of ACEs
Eating Disorders 

Another common mental health concern that can show up in the school setting is disordered
eating. Like many mental health disorders discussed, eating disorders have also had a history of
misunderstanding and misconceptions. Let's review some of the common types of eating
disorders, their symptoms, and treatments.
Eating Disorders
Slide 1
Defining Eating Disorders 

Eating disorders are very common, especially in teenagers. While stereotypes
associated with eating disorders include adolescent girls, especially from a uent
backgrounds or who are very thin and athletic, eating disorders are common across all
genders and backgrounds. Diagnosed eating disorders are more common in girls and
women, but they are also present in boys and men, and they are present in all
ethnicities and all economic backgrounds.
Importantly, eating disorders are not a choice and are not just about food or body
image, but are rather caused by a complex interaction of biological, psychological,
and environmental factors. Eating disorders also commonly occur in families and may
have a genetic component, and frequently occur with other mental health concerns,
such as anxiety, depression, or substance use.
Slide 2
Symptoms 

There are subtypes of eating disorders, but general symptoms to look out for include:
Negative body image or low self-esteem; self-esteem that is tied to
weight/appearance
Fasting, restricted food intake, or excessive food intake in a short time frame
(binges)
Excessive exercising
Misuse of laxatives or diuretics
Anxiety and depression - either present before the onset of the eating disorder,
or caused by malnutrition from the disorder
Low body weight (being underweight)
Guilt and shame around eating; eating in secret
Now that we know general symptoms, let's take a look at some of the subtypes you
may see.
Slide 3
Subtypes 

Some subtypes of eating disorders include:
Anorexia Nervosa: 

Characterized by excessive exercise/severely restricted eating,
concern with weight loss and thinness, and a low body weight (underweight).
Bulimia Nervosa: 

Characterized by eating much larger amounts of food than
usual in a short time span (binge eating) followed by compensatory or "purging"
behaviors, such as self-induced vomiting, use of laxatives or diuretics, fasting,
or excessive exercise. People with bulimia are typically a normal/healthy weight.
Binge-eating Disorder: 

Characterized by binge eating similar to bulimia, but
without compensatory behaviors. Binge eating is often associated with a large
amount of guilt and shame and may happen in secret. People with binge-eating
disorder may be a normal weight or overweight/obese.
Avoidant Restrictive Food Intake Disorder (ARFID): 

This disorder involves difficulties with eating enough food, but without underlying concerns about
body image. People with ARFID may avoid eating due to anxiety about food (such
as a fear of choking or getting sick), losing interest in eating, or dislike for
textures, taste, or smell. This avoidance of food leads to nutritional deﬁciencies
and extreme weight loss.
Other Eating Disorders: 

Some people may have eating disorders that do not
cleanly ﬁt these categories. For example, many youth may have symptoms of
anorexia, such as severe restriction of food intake, excessive exercise, and
negative body image, but still have a normal weight.
Slide 4
Treatment 

When left untreated, eating disorders are one of the most dangerous types of mental
health disorders and have the highest mortality rate of many mental illnesses. Eating
disorders are extremely disruptive to health and wellbeing and can cause:
Nutritional deﬁciencies
Being underweight
Disrupted bowel movements, such as constipation or diarrhea
Irregular or absent menstrual cycles in girls
Fainting, dizziness, or lightheadedness
Muscle weakness
Other health problems
While eating disorders are very concerning, there are also many treatments available.
Eating disorders can be treated by multidisciplinary teams: addressing weight and
nutritional deﬁciencies may be needed by a nutritionist or doctor, psychiatrists may
diagnose comorbid conditions (such as anxiety/depression) and prescribe
medications, and counselors may provide individual or family therapies. Treatment
can be provided in residential treatment facilities or in outpatient settings, such as
community mental health offices or schools.
Summary 

There are various types of eating disorders that can show up in many students, most
often in adolescence but sometimes before then. Some signs to look out for are
restricted eating, concern with body image, low energy or muscle weakness, drastic
weight changes, and symptoms of anxiety and depression. Eating disorders can be
very dangerous if left untreated, so connecting youth exhibiting symptoms with
support is essential.
Let's review the lesson. 

Tier 3 is the most intensive level of MTSS. It can be used to provide signiﬁcant
support to youth with mental health needs. There are many advantages to
supporting youth mental health in the school setting, including the ease of access
that students have to care and the use of MTSS.
Mental health needs are common in the school setting and have increased since the
pandemic. Up to 20% of youth in schools may need access to mental health
services.
There are many mental health needs that may show up in the school setting that
can be internalizing or externalizing.
Externalizing disorders tend to have overt, observable behaviors and include ADHD,
behavior/conduct disorders, and substance use disorder. Internalizing disorders
are more self-directed, with fewer outward behaviors, and include anxiety,
depression, OCD, PTSD, and eating disorders.
Mental health conditions are largely treatable, and everyone in the school setting
can contribute to providing support and empathy to students in their time of need.
Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance


@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance
Outcomes: 

1. Explore the concept of the therapeutic alliance and recognize its importance
2. Review best practices for building therapeutic alliances
3. Understand the therapeutic alliance within the school setting
4. Apply cultural responsiveness in the therapeutic alliance
5. Analyze assessment measures related to the therapeutic alliance
Insights into the Therapeutic Alliance
Building Strong Relationships
One of the most critical factors in successful treatment is the therapeutic alliance. The
therapeutic alliance refers to the relationship between an individual and their mental health
provider. The therapeutic alliance is not speciﬁc to any disorder, intervention, or treatment type
 it is a universal component of therapy across all treatment modalities and interventions. A
successful therapeutic alliance can make a signiﬁcant difference in treatment outcomes.     
...the therapeutic relationship is as powerful, if not more powerful, than the
particular treatment method a therapist is using.
John C. Norcross, PhD, ABPP, Chair of the American Psychological Association Task Force
Core Values That Foster a Strong Therapeutic Alliance
Therapeutic alliances are built from the very beginning of treatment and are part of an ongoing
and continuously evolving process. There are many ways to have a successful therapeutic
alliance, and many factors affect it. This means that the therapeutic alliance may look different
for everyone who comes to treatment.
While there are many ways to build a therapeutic alliance, there are some core values that are
generally beneﬁcial across the board. If you took our  All Hands on Deck  course, you may
already be familiar with Carl Rogers  work. He is a key founder in the ﬁeld of humanistic
psychology, especially in terms of personality development. He made signiﬁcant contributions
to the ﬁeld by highlighting the importance of a collaborative therapeutic relationship. Rogers
described the key features of the clinician that support the development of this trusting
relationship: genuineness, empathy, and unconditional positive regard.
Let's do a quick review of these fundamental values. Flip
each card.
Genuineness: 

the quality of being honest and
sincere     
Empathy: 

understanding and relating to
another person s feelings and
imagining their experiences; goes
beyond sympathy
Unconditional Positive Regard: 

approaching relationships and
interactions with a non-judgmental
attitude, respect for the other
person's lived experiences, and the
belief that they are doing the best
they can
To build strong positive relationships with students and their families, it is essential to
consistently prioritize these core values and interactions. 
In my early professional years, I was asking the question: How can I treat, or
cure, or change this person? Now I would phrase the question in this way: How
can I provide a relationship which this person may use for his own personal
growth?
- Carl Rogers, American Psychologist
American Psychologist, Edward Bordin, offered a broad theory of the therapeutic alliance in
1979. Like Carl Rogers, Bordin viewed a collaborative and trusting relationship as a critical factor
in client change.
Click through the list  below to explore Edward Bordin's
Three-Component Model of the Therapeutic Alliance.
In Bordin s theory, strong bonds have bidirectional positive regard and confidence: providers believe in
the individual s innate goodness, strengths and attributes and their ability to heal. Meanwhile, the
individual receiving treatment believes in the clinician s expertise, compassion, support, and ability to
help them. This is where the values of unconditional positive regard, empathy, and genuineness can come
into play. These core values help facilitate strong, meaningful bonds. 
Goals are the mutually identified objectives achieved through therapy. For example, a goal for a student
with social anxiety may be to increase their comfort in social interactions.
It is important to establish these goals during the treatment planning process with agreement from both
parties, though these goals can be modified with feedback throughout treatment. Goals that the student is
not interested in, or that feel like too much, can make treatment a more difficult experience and damage
the relationship. More information about forming goals will be in our Treatment Planning lession.
Tasks are strategies used to help meet goals.
For example, a student with social anxiety may be trying to meet the goal of increasing comfort in social
interaction. A task for this goal may be to try raising their hand in class five times per week.
Like goals, a mutual agreement on tasks is key. A way to achieve this buy-in is to emphasize the value of
the tasks toward goal achievement. If you are met with resistance, try a "foot-in-the-door" technique.  As
in the example above, if you requested a hand raise five times per week yet are met with resistance, you
can meet in the middle with a hand raise three times per week. It can damage your relationship with
students if they are asked to do activities in or outside of treatment that seem too overwhelming. Having
open and two-way communication helps facilitate agreement on tasks. 
Take a moment and think about relationships that you ﬁnd to be especially
helpful and supportive, such as professionals you've worked with or family and
friends.
What are some characteristics of these relationships that you appreciate the most?
Great job reﬂecting  it's helpful to connect this discussion back to your own experiences. From
this lens, let's consider the perspective of students receiving therapeutic support. it's important
to remember that students have certain preferences and expectations. 
Let's take a look what students have to say about the
therapeutic relationship.
Gibson, et al. (2015) surveyed adolescents about their perception of therapy as a resource and
what they wanted most out of the experience. Some common responses were: 
Having agency/control: During adolescence, students are building their identities
and want to have agency and control over decisions that are made about their care.
Collaboration is key here decisions should be made together, with adolescent
feedback and input given consideration.     
Talking freely and being listened to non-judgmentally: Adolescents wanted to feel
safe and supported in the therapeutic relationship. Core values of empathy and
unconditional positive regard can help students feel comfortable sharing in the
therapy setting. 
Friendships over professional relationships: While clinicians do have a
professional role to play, adolescents preferred the relationship to be more like a
friendship. Again, this helps to make the relationship more comfortable and better
facilitates the ability to share and connect on a deeper level.
Accessible and ﬂexible service delivery: Adolescents were more satisﬁed with the
therapeutic relationship when they received services in a way that worked best for
them. Some adolescents are more comfortable utilizing technology to participate in
therapy through tele-mental health platforms, such as video calls or phone calls,
rather than traditional in-person services. You ll review more on telemental health
in an upcoming lesson  Having the ﬂexibility to meet the unique needs of different
students is a key skill in building successful relationships and treatments.     
Gibson and his colleagues' research highlights the invaluable insights of students regarding
their therapeutic needs and preferences. It is important to recognize the signiﬁcance of agency,
empathetic listening, friendship-like bonds, and ﬂexible service delivery in creating meaningful
therapeutic connections with students. By embracing these principles, providers can foster an
environment where students feel empowered, heard, and supported on their journey toward
well-being and personal growth.
The Journey to a Strong Therapeutic Relationship 

In this lesson, we will continue to explore the essential aspects of building a strong therapeutic
alliance within the school setting. We will discuss various strategies and insights to navigate the
delicate relationship between school mental health professionals and students. Additionally, we
will emphasize how cultural awareness and sensitivity play pivotal roles in creating an inclusive
and supportive atmosphere for all students. We will wrap up the lesson by looking at
assessment measures that serve to monitor the therapeutic alliance, equipping providers with
the tools to gauge the effectiveness of their practices and make informed decisions to better support students
How to Cultivate a Strong Therapeutic Alliance 

Key Strategies
General Best Practices 

You understand the importance of strong therapeutic alliances. Now Let's explore some best
practices for building them. 
Here are some general best practices for supporting strong therapeutic alliances described by
DeAngelis (2019): 
Mutuality and Collaboration 

Contemporary mental health treatment emphasizes the importance of mutuality and
collaboration, where therapists and clients are equal partners  working together to deﬁne and
actualize therapy goals, including the direction the therapy is taking  (DeAngelis, 2019).
Forming an equal partnership between clients and therapists involves a commitment to this two-
way relationship.
Flexibility and Responsiveness 

Every student is unique. One size does not ﬁt all in treatments and interventions. Students have
different personalities, abilities, strengths, and challenges. Flexibility and responsiveness help
you adjust service delivery in a way that allows treatment to be individualized. When you're
ﬂexible, you can consider and meet the unique needs and attributes of each student.
Flexibility could appear in the method of service delivery, such as when and where treatment
sessions take place. This could look like agreeing to have sessions after school hours if that works
better with the student s schedule. Being ﬂexible lets the student know you are willing to meet
their needs, and this helps build trust and positive regard in the relationship.
Related to ﬂexibility is responsiveness or noticing changes and then modifying treatment based
on them. Modiﬁcations may be changes to goals or treatment methods, treatment approaches, or
styles of interaction. For example, a school-based mental health clinician may notice that
mindfulness meditations do not improve a student s anxiety symptoms. They may then decide to
respond by changing the method of treatment.
Feedback 

One way to facilitate ﬂexibility and responsiveness is to actively seek out feedback from students
through their recommendations and suggestions for what is and isn't working for them. There
are many ways to gather feedback, depending on the situation. Examples include directly asking,
conducting surveys, or using teacher observations.
Directly asking students can facilitate clear conversations, but some students may be
uncomfortable directly providing feedback. Surveys or session rating scales can be used in a way
that is more comfortable. These measures can also provide data to follow progress over time. One
such system is the Partners for Change Outcomes Management System (PCOMS) - to learn more
about PCOMS, keep going with the lesson  
Teacher observations are also useful. Teacher input on students  progress provides valuable
information on whether treatment methods are working or need to be modiﬁed.
Responding to Negative Emotions 

Experiencing negative emotions is one of the most common reasons that people seek out
therapy, so it is essential to respond to negative emotions effectively. This can be challenging,
especially when interacting with many 
different students every day. Being overwhelmed can lead
different students every day. Being overwhelmed can lead
to provider burnout and compassion fatigue, which makes it much harder to engage effectively.
Self-care and self-awareness can help prevent this and ensure that students receive the best care
You may recall that we emphasize this point and provide various strategies in our Tier 1
lesson, Wellness Enhancement for School Staff.
Ending Effectively 

Knowing when to start treatment is important, but it is equally important to know when to end.
Treatment planning may set an end date from the start, but this may need to be adjusted based on
the progress being made. Ultimately, the goal of therapy is to increase students' self-su ciency.
However, it's also essential not to end too early. Therefore, it is necessary to have a plan for what
indicates that students are truly ready to end treatment. This planning balances their need for
independence and makes sure that they have gotten the most out of therapy. Strategies for a
successful ending include: 
mutual discussion about how the therapy went 
discussion of future plans for coping and functioning 
help with using new skills (growth is an ongoing process) 
expression of pride in the student for growth and progress and appreciation of the
relationship 
Ideally, this conversation should take place during a scheduled meeting or conference where the
student, family members, and all relevant parties can participate.
Therapy can also conclude at opportune moments, aligning with the end of a school year or
semester, allowing for a seamless transition. 
Along with these best practices, the growth of the therapeutic alliance is linked to the successful
resolution of ruptures, breaches, and repairs (Ardito & Rabellino, 2011). Let's explore what this
means.
Repairing Ruptures 

There are many times when the alliance may encounter problems, such as disagreements,
mistrust, or misinterpretations. These are called breaches or ruptures. Ruptures are not
uncommon within therapeutic relationships. In fact, research suggests that these ruptures may
be inevitable in any therapeutic alliance (Muran, 2000). The ability to respond to these issues
quickly can make the difference between good and great therapy.
When therapeutic relations break down, ruptures must be repaired. Signs of a rupture can
include a student withdrawing or becoming confrontational, including verbal and nonverbal
expressions of frustration or anger (DeAngelis, 2019).
Such distancing behavior may result from a lack of trust or the student feeling judged or
misunderstood. If the therapist senses the start of a breakdown or a strain in the relationship,
they must not let it grow but clarify any issues and repair mistakes (Knox & Cooper, 2015).
Let's look at some best practices to respond effectively
to ruptures.
Step 1
Recognize the Rupture 

The ﬁrst step in repairing ruptures is being aware that there is one. Sometimes, it will be
clear that a rupture has occurred:
students may directly tell you that there is a problem
you may get feedback from caregivers
you may notice concerning behaviors or a change in behavior
However, at other times, it may be more difficult to tell that there is a problem:
a student may not be comfortable sharing that there has been an issue
they may communicate the problem in more subtle ways
In general, signs of ruptures can be assigned to two categories: confrontation and
withdrawal (Muran, 2010).
Confrontation involves a direct discussion of the issue causing the rupture. It could be that a
student tells you directly that something has offended them, upset them, or is just not
working for them. It is crucial not to take confrontations personally, but instead, use them as
opportunities to grow and continue building the alliance.
Withdrawal occurs when there is a problem, but the student may not feel comfortable
expressing it directly. Instead, they may participate less in treatment. Withdrawal could look
like canceling sessions, giving one-word responses to questions, or not following treatment
plans. Withdrawal can be challenging to detect because something else could also cause
these behaviors. If you feel that a student may be withdrawing, it may be helpful to directly
ask about it in a way that is empathetic and understanding, based on curiosity rather than
criticism. 
Step 2
Explore Solutions 

Once you have identiﬁed that a rupture is happening, the next step is to explore solutions.
Since ruptures are so common, it is important to have strategies for responding to them. No
matter how the rupture is addressed, it is important to always stay open-minded and to work
openly and honestly to repair it.
There are two main ways to address ruptures: directly or indirectly (Muran, 2010). Directly
addressing the issue may include talking about it with the student. Indirectly addressing the
issue may involve the clinician adjusting treatment plans or goals without directly discussing
it. Direct and indirect approaches may both be used in different circumstances.  
Step 3
Apply Solutions 

Once you have found a solution, the next step is to implement it. Some examples of
implementing solutions may be:
adjusting the number of sessions per week
breaking down a goal that is too overwhelming into smaller steps
increasing the time frame of treatment
Solutions may also focus on the relationship: if a rupture was caused by something said by a
clinician, it may be necessary to apologize and use the feedback to avoid similar phrases in
the future. No matter what the solution is, it is important to be consistent and follow through
with the modiﬁcations that are made. This helps build trust and shows that you are reliable. 
Putting Values into Practice
We have reviewed values and best practices of creating a strong therapeutic alliance. Now let's
examine the use of foundational communication techniques that show these values in action.
Communication in the Therapeutic Relationship 

The cornerstone of productive and empathetic communication is the art of active and
reﬂective listening. Active and reﬂective listening techniques form the foundation for effective
communication and are invaluable skills in building meaningful relationships. Let's explore
each of them in detail to grasp their signiﬁcance in fostering better connections and empathy
within all of your interactions.
Active Listening 

Research conducted by Pinto, et al. (2012) identiﬁed active listening as the primary factor that
enhances engagement in building a strong therapeutic alliance. Listening may sound simple -
after all, you listen to people talk every day. However, there is more to effective listening than
meets the eye (or ear).
Active listening involves using gestures, comments, and body language to show that you are
listening attentively. You might remember this from the  All Hands on Deck  course  Active
listening is important in building a therapeutic alliance because it helps show that you are
invested and interested in the student, which helps to build trust and rapport. Click through the
tabs below for tips on being an active listener.
Be Fully Present 

To be actively involved in a therapy session, the ﬁrst step is being fully present. Being fully present
communicates to the student that you are there for them and committed to working with them,
helping to build trust and comfort in communication. Being fully present shows students that
they have your undivided attention. This can mean a lot of different things, but in general, you
want to:
have open body language (for example, facing the student, comfortable, nodding, etc.)
maintain eye contact
be aware of the surroundings
focus on what is being said
minimize distractions/disruptions
Pay Attention to Nonverbal Cues 

Nonverbal cues can be underestimated in our communication; however, these cues make up
around 65% of the meaning being communicated. For example, a student who feels sad or tired
may put their head down on their desk. Facial expressions and body language are important
nonverbal cues to pay attention to as well  
Use Short, Verbal Affirmations and Acknowledgments 

Using short, verbal affirmations allows you to show you are listening without interrupting. They
include words, phrases, and sounds like: 
That makes sense  
I see what you mean.  
Go on.
Yes.
Mhm.
Right.
Withhold Judgment 

The goals of active listening are to understand what is being said and to show your attentiveness
and engagement. Making judgments, arguing, or disagreeing with the speaker can distract from
the content of what they are saying. One way to think of this is that you are listening to
understand, not to respond. This can be challenging because often, in everyday conversations, we
spend a lot of time planning what to say in response to someone. However, this is not the goal for
active listening. 
Reflective Listening
One way to apply active listening skills is to put what you heard to the test by reﬂecting what you
heard by paraphrasing what was said back to the speaker. This is called reﬂective listening.
Reﬂective listening is a strategy for building a strong, empathetic relationship. This sounds like
a simple skill, but it can be very powerful in showing empathy and understanding.
Let's review this video example, in which Sadness (blue
character) is listening to Bing-Bong (pink character): 
Communication Skills: Empathetic Listening - Inside Out, 2015
Communication Skills: Empathetic Listening - Inside Out, 2015
What went well in Sadness s interaction with Bing Bong?
How do you think she helped him?
With that interaction in mind, Let's look at some of the advantages of reﬂective listening and
why it can be helpful. 
Non-judgmental: Earlier, it was mentioned that one of the aspects adolescents want
most within a therapeutic relationship is a non-judgmental space to talk. When you
listen reﬂectively, you are not trying to change the person s mind, offer solutions,
or make any judgments about what is said, either positively or negatively. Instead,
you are showing that you heard and understood it. 
Ensure Everyone is on the Same Page: This can help prevent miscommunications.
By reﬂecting on what you hear or observe, students have an opportunity to clarify
any misunderstandings. Sometimes, especially for younger children, they may not
be able to express exactly what they are feeling yet. Talking through the problems
together can help them (and you) address the issue more directly and accurately.
Allows Students to be Heard: Again, sometimes just being heard is a valuable
experience. Reﬂective listening shows the speaker that they were understood,
heard, and validated. This is mutually beneﬁcial  it helps build trust and rapport
and makes a stronger therapeutic alliance. It can also be a cathartic release for the
speaker.
Here are some phrases the show reﬂective listening. Click to enlarge.
Reﬂective Listening Examples
When using reﬂective listening, it can be helpful to differentiate between the layers of what a
speaker is saying. Flip through the cards below to see these different layers.
What is being said at a surface
level? What did the student tell you?
What is it that they are talking
about? It can be important to clarify
the details of what is happening on
a surface level before going deeper.
What feelings are being
communicated? Sometimes,
they can be explicitly stated or
underneath the surface and
implied. Feelings may be shown
by words, but also by body
language and demeanor
(remember the importance of
nonverbal cues ). If you are
unsure of what someone is
While reﬂective listening is a powerful skill, it takes time to develop and can be challenging.
feelings. This is where you put
Let's look at some common issues to avoid when using reﬂective listening.
Combination of content and
together what you discovered,
linking the two together in a
cohesive statement. This might
include phrases like,  It seems like
you were feeling ___ because ___.
High-Risk Responses 

A  high-risk  response in listening is a statement that is likely to take the focus away from the
conversation and generate negative feelings (Katz and McNulty, 1994). Some of these phrases
may have a valid use in certain contexts, but they are not ideal for meeting the goals of reﬂective
listening. These statements also can be distracting or perceived as condescending or
judgmental. 
Take a look at the three categories of high-risk responses below. 
Evaluating and Judging: As mentioned earlier, the approach of reﬂective listening is
intended to show a lack of judgment, creating a safe space to share true thoughts
and feelings. 
Solving: Sometimes, solutions are necessary. However, at other times, coming up
with solutions can be distracting from the issue at hand. it's important to ﬁrst
make sure that you understand the situation well enough to come up with effective
and useful solutions. You must also know that the student wants and is ready for
solutions. It can be helpful to check in with the speaker and see if they want
solutions at this moment, or if they just want to talk.
Withdrawing: Withdrawing responses and phrases can also get in the way of
reﬂective listening. Withdrawing responses communicate to the student that you
are uncomfortable with the emotions they express. Such a response can also
minimize what the person may be going through and shut down the conversation.
This can make it harder to build trust in the relationship, and students may be less
willing to open up again in the future. 
Click through these  ashcards to look at some examples
of each type of high-risk response. Before you turn the
card over, try to think of your own examples of these
types of unwanted responses.
Judging: 

I disagree.
You shouldn t have done that.
Why would you do that?
That s your fault.  
You re only thinking this way
because you are angry.
You have problems with
authority.
Solving: 

You need to do ___.  
You should try doing ___.  
This is the right thing to do.  
I would suggest that you ____.  
If I were you, I would ____.  
You could  x this by ____.  
Withdrawing: 

Every cloud has a silver lining.  
Everything happens for a reason.  
You will feel better tomorrow.  
Other people have it worse.  
Look on the bright side...  
Try not to worry about it so much.
Now that we've uncovered the importance of active and reﬂective listening, let's put your
knowledge to the test
Growing Trust and Connection 

Nurturing the Therapeutic Alliance in the School Setting
As we look into the intricacies of nurturing therapeutic alliance in a school setting, it's
important to emphasize that working with children and teens comes with its own set of
considerations and challenges. Factors such as motivation, attachment style, developmental
stage, family engagement, and cultural background can signiﬁcantly impact the maintenance and
success of a strong therapeutic relationship. Let's explore each of these factors in detail to
better understand their importance in the school context.
Motivation 

Research has found that around 40-60% of youth drop out of or do not complete therapy
(Duncan, et al., 2006). 
A relevant factor to consider when building a therapeutic alliance is motivation. One unique
aspect of working with youth in a school environment is that youth are typically not self-
referred to treatment. Youth may be provided services not because they asked for them but
because parents, teachers, or other concerned adults identiﬁed the need. This can, in turn,
affect their motivation to participate in therapy. 
Various levels of motivation are described by the stages of the change model (Prochaska &
Velicer, 1997). While this model was originally developed for those seeking to quit smoking, it
has broad applications and is used for many types of goals, both in and out of mental health. 
The model has distinct stages, but it is not a one-time or linear process; people may go between
various stages in a different order, go through each stage multiple times, or even show features
of multiple stages at the same time.
Click through the tabs below to see how the stages of
change could show up in the school setting.
Precontemplation 

This is the ﬁrst stage of the model and involves little desire for change or awareness of a problem.
Many children may be at this stage, especially if they are not developmentally able to understand
why they were referred to treatment. They may also be at a stage where they understand the
problem but are uninterested in treatment because they had no input and were referred by an
adult. It is important to modify treatment based on these distinct issues to avoid pushing students
too far and causing resentment. The precontemplation stage has four subcategories:
Reluctant: Reluctant students are in the precontemplation stage of change because they may
be unaware of the problem or do not consider it important. A strategy for engaging with
reluctance is to discuss it empathetically and sensitively, asking open-ended questions.
These students may not be directly opposed to treatment, but they are still hesitant. 
Rebellious: Rebellious students may actively and directly oppose treatment. They may be
rebellious because of stigma, past negative experiences with treatment, or a desire for
independence which may be more common in adolescents because of their increasing need
for autonomy. It is important to consider these concerns compassionately and
empathetically to build trust   one strategy for this may be providing choices in treatment
sessions to show collaboration.
Resigned: These students may not be opposed to treatment but feel as though they do not
have the capability to change. The idea of change may seem too overwhelming, or they may
view their situation as  just the way things are.  Those with depression may be more
susceptible to resigned mindsets. Strategies for overcoming a resigned mindset include
instilling hope, building conﬁdence, and breaking down goals into smaller and more
manageable pieces. One way to build conﬁdence is to note progress or use strength-based
language  highlighting and emphasizing the student's strengths, abilities, and positive
qualities, rather than dwelling on weaknesses or deﬁcits. 
Rationalizing: Rationalizing mindsets give reasons for why they are not interested in
treatment   they may have clear reasons to reject therapy. Engaging with a student's
rationalizations has the potential to turn into a debate or argument. It is important to use
empathetic and reﬂective listening strategies with rationalizing mindsets.
Contemplation 

This is a stage of conﬂict. People may realize the need for change but have conﬂicting views about
it. A student in this stage may understand why they are receiving mental health treatment, but
they are not sure if they want it or not. Sometimes a student may be conﬂicted because they have
internalized stigma. For example, a student may be experiencing symptoms of depression and
want relief but be afraid that going to counseling may make them appear  weak  or too different
from others. Again, this can also be the case if a student is referred to treatment by an adult or
authority ﬁgure. The student may not be 100% on board if they did not make the decision to
pursue treatment. 
Preparation/Determination 

In this stage, students are preparing to make changes. They see something in their life that they
want to change, improve, or grow, and they prepare to make those changes. In a school setting,
this might look like a student who acknowledges they are experiencing mental health challenges
and reaches out to a trusted adult for help. 
Action 

In this stage, students actively address concerns and follow through on a plan. In a school setting,
this might mean that a student actively engages with treatment, attends therapy sessions, and
follows their treatment plan.   
Maintenance 

The maintenance stage involves using the skills learned during treatment to support the progress
that has been made. For example, a student who experiences panic attacks may use their
knowledge of panic attack triggers to know when to use coping strategies or reach out for
additional support. 
Great job learning about the stages of change  Depending on your student's level of motivation
and attitudes about therapy, you may need to consider adjusting some of the techniques and
strategies that you use to build rapport. It is important to meet clients where they are, rather
than where you might want them to be. Here are some strategies for building rapport with
students who may come to treatment before they are ready, as well as some responses to avoid. 
Table of dos and dont's (Adapted from DiGiuseppe et al., 1996) 
Attachment Style 

Another factor to consider when building a therapeutic alliance is the attachment styles of both
the student and the provider. The theory of attachment, originally developed by  John Bowlby
(1969), describes ways that people tend to bond with others, called  attachment styles.  Based
on this theory attachment styles are developed from early childhood experiences. The
attachment style that a person has is reﬂective of the relationship they may have had with early
caregivers. Everyone has an attachment style, including students and school-based mental
health clinicians, and this can show up in the way that a therapeutic alliance forms. Awareness
of both student attachment styles and your own attachment style can inform a successful
strategy for building a strong therapeutic alliance. There are four general attachment styles or
default ways of forming relationships.
Flip the  ashcards below to explore common
attachment styles.
Secure 

Secure attachments come from
strong, supportive, and loving
relationships with early caregivers.
Love and safety are consistently
given in early childhood, and this
leads to feeling safe and con dent
in forming connections with others.
Anxious 

Anxious (also referred to as
ambivalent) attachment stems
from inconsistent experiences
with caregivers in early
childhood. Love and safety are
provided, but not consistently.
This leads to fear in forming
connections with others,
particularly fear of
abandonment. All students may
Avoidant 

Avoidant attachment also
stems from experiences with
caregivers in early childhood.
This style is theorized to come
Disorganized attachment
from emotional or physical
comes from inconsistent and
needs not being met. As a
unsafe relationships in early
result, the child perceives
childhood. This attachment
rejection from their caregiver.
style results in feelings of
This leads to a sensitivity to
unease in relationships and
rejection and a desire for
inconsistent behaviors.
Disorganized attachment may
include behaviors from
avoidant and
4 of 4
Developmental Stage 

Working within the school setting it is important to consider a student's developmental stage
which inﬂuences the methods and techniques that may be used to build the therapeutic alliance.
The most effective techniques to build a therapeutic relationship with a five-year-old are quite
different from the most effective techniques for a sixteen-year-old. Let's look at some key
developmental milestones to take into account when choosing approaches to establishing
therapeutic connections across different age groups.
Early Childhood: ages 0   5 

Communication through play
Learning language/vocabulary
Developing ﬁne motor skills
Developing problem-solving and critical thinking skills
Developing early literacy skills
Middle Childhood: ages 6-12 

Growing in independence
Growing vocabulary and ability to express feelings and emotions
Continuing to develop ﬁne motor skills, problem-solving, and
critical thinking skills
Adolescence: ages 13+ 

Growing need for independence
Developing and reﬁning individual identity
Transitioning to adulthood
it's important to remember that children of the same age may look different. Development is
not the same in every child, so looking at a child s age alone may not be enough to determine
what techniques are best for building a therapeutic relationship. It is also important to consider
how needs change throughout these various developmental stages. Using feedback and
observing how students respond to you can help you adjust your rapport-building strategies. 
Family Engagement 

Family involvement is part of a successful and effective school-based mental health program.
When you are working with children and teens, the therapeutic alliance is not just between the
provider and the student   it also includes a relationship with their family and caregivers.
Collaboration with families allows mental health providers to develop treatment plans that are
realistic and align with the family's values, resources, and goals.  Families can serve as an
ongoing source of support and reinforcement for therapeutic interventions. Their active
involvement can help sustain progress. Thus, the same strategies of unconditional positive
regard, empathy, and genuineness can also be applied when working with families to ensure
that relationships are strong. Stay tuned for our  Inclusive Treatment Planning  lesson to learn
more speciﬁc techniques for building strong relationships with families. 
Cultural Responsiveness 

Promoting a Nurturing Therapeutic Environment
Cultural identities inﬂuence our lives, impact our experiences, shape our values, and become a
lens through which we see the world. When building relationships, it is important to consider
how our worldviews may be different from others. Having differences in cultural identities does
 not prevent successful therapeutic alliances from being built, and research supports that these
alliances can be equally strong; however, it is a factor to consider (Wintersteen et al., 2005).
Research identiﬁes two possible barriers. Clients may be less comfortable with a provider who
has a different identity than them, and providers may have implicit biases (Liu, et al., 2022).
Developing a multicultural orientation can help address these issues. Let's look at the pieces of a
multicultural orientation (Hook, et al., 2018).
Multicultural Orientation 

Multicultural orientation means that you consider your own and your students' backgrounds,
beliefs, and values when you are helping them. Multicultural orientation has three interrelated
components: (a) cultural humility and respect, deﬁned as a practitioner s tendency to be client-
centered, curious, and open to diverse perspectives; (b) cultural opportunity, or the degree to
which a practitioner can pick up on and address cultural themes when they come up in
treatment sessions; and (c) cultural comfort, or the practitioner s level of calm and courage in
engaging in discussions of culture and identity.
Developing a Multicultural Orientation 

 Two important skills that can help develop a multicultural orientation:
Start by understanding your own culture and implicit bias.  Recognize how your own
cultural background inﬂuences your interactions. Implicit bias, though often unconscious,
can also impact your communication and actions. Identifying and addressing these biases
helps align your behavior with your values. We mentioned in our core MTSS course that
taking the Implicit Association Test (IAT) is a great place to start in building self-
awareness. 
Understand your students' cultures.  Learn about your students' backgrounds, their values,
beliefs, and traditions. Avoid stereotypes and remember that individuals within a culture
can be diverse so avoid stereotypes. Don't assume, ask questions  Then adapt your
approach to each student as appropriate for true cultural responsiveness.
To learn more about the multicultural orientation
framework download the PDF below.
The Multicultural Orientation Framework.pdf
140.3 KB
Self-Reﬂection:
What are your cultural identities? How might that show up in your school-based clinician role? 
For more information on applying cultural competence to your practice, download the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Association (SAMHSA) guidelines below
Improving Cultural Competence Quick Guide.pdf
414 KB
And, to review an example of applying cultural skills in practice, follow the link below to an
article on the National Alliance for Mental Illness (NAMI)'s website.
How School-Based Mental Health Providers Can Help
Hispanic/Latinx Students
Jaime Torres has been seeing his school social worker, Theresa Jones, for
individual and family therapy for some time now. The bright, timid high school
senior grappled with feelings of hopelessness and panic attacks for several
years. His struggles started with palpitations, night sweats and an
overwhelming sense of the room spinning out of control.
READ MORE NAMI 
Let's review the lesson.
The therapeutic alliance is a powerful tool for providing 
effective and supportive therapy. Therapeutic alliances are built from the very beginning of treatment and
are part of an ongoing and continuously evolving process.
In order to increase the likelihood that treatment and support will be effective
Edward Bordin (1979) proposed that the therapeutic alliance has three key
elements: an agreement on goals; a collaboration on tasks; and the development of
a bond between the practitioner and the person being supported.
It is important to recognize the signiﬁcance of agency, empathetic listening,
friendship-like bonds, and ﬂexible service delivery in creating meaningful
therapeutic connections with students. By embracing these principles, providers
can foster an environment where students feel empowered, heard, and supported
on their journey toward well-being and personal growth.
Communication skills, such as active/reﬂective listening and repairing ruptures,
can help build the therapeutic alliance
Factors such as motivation, attachment style, developmental stage, family
engagement, and cultural background can signiﬁcantly impact the maintenance and
success of a strong therapeutic alliance.
Applying a multicultural orientation is essential in building strong relationships and
it involves three interrelated components; cultural humility, cultural opportunity,
and cultural comfort.
Feedback for the therapeutic alliance can be sought out formally or informally, and
one formal tool is PCOMS. Results from the PCOMS surveys can be analyzed to help
identify any issues that may have been missed during sessions. 
EXIT
***** Growing Your Tier 3 Supports - 1.2
Welcome to Growing Your Tier 3 Supports  In this course, you will learn about the
interventions, best practices, and implementation of Tier 3 of Multi-tiered System
of Supports (MTSS), with a focus on supporting behavioral and mental health. Like
seeds planted in a garden, growing supports at Tier 3 creates a beautiful garden
where everyone is ﬂourishing. Let's get started
Collaborative Care and Case Management
Inclusive Treatment Planning
Lesson 1 of 2
***** Collaborative Care and Case Management 
Outcomes:
1. Understand and consider the effectiveness of a collaborative care model in the school
setting
2. Recognize the core features of case management services and the function of the case
managers
3. Identify the principles of the Wraparound service delivery process for students with
severe emotional/behavioral concerns
4. Consider cultural awareness, equity, and inclusion practices in the coordination of
mental health services for students
Building Stronger School Communities 

Integrating Mental Health Providers into the Academic Setting: The Collaborative Care Model 

Parents and caregivers who have a child that is struggling with mental health issues face many
challenges. 
Knowing what to do, where to go, and what questions to ask can be confusing and, at times,
discouraging.
The goal of mental and behavioral health services in schools is to make sure students can easily
get the support they need to thrive. Families often rely on schools to help them understand and
successfully navigate behavioral and mental health support for their children. But sometimes,
there are obstacles that make it hard to provide this help effectively. One common barrier is a
disconnected relationship between support provided in school and services provided outside
the school. Let's pinpoint some of these issues.
In some cases, school staff may not know who the outside clinicians are, which
students they are working with, or what they are working on (Barrett et al., 2013)
Sometimes the mental health provider might only come to the school for a short
time each week, like one or two days. They may not be seen as a regular part of the
school's support team.
Within schools, those providing direct services to children and students, including
counselors, school psychologists, and social workers, are often siloed and work in
relative isolation from one another (Adelman & Taylor, 2021). This affects how well
they can provide support in the classrooms.
School staff might think that only mental health professionals should handle all the
mental health support.
All of these situations show that schools and mental health providers need better ways to work
together to provide students with support. Building relationships between community
providers, school staff, and families can make it easier for students to get the right help. One
way to do this is by using a teamwork approach, and a support network of collaborative care.
Collaborative care is, in general, a family-focused service delivery system that empowers
parents with the tools to: 
better address the needs of their child
prioritize information
easily connect with much-needed resources in and outside of the school setting
That sounds great, right? But let's dive into this a bit deeper.
Understanding Collaborative Care 

A student who experiences difficulties in multiple areas requires targeted assistance from
educators and providers who may not communicate or coordinate effectively with one another.
This creates division and gaps in care. That is where the collaborative care integrated system
comes in  This model of collaboration was originally developed in the 1990s by researchers at
the University of Washington for implementation in the healthcare system. Physicians and
psychiatric specialists worked together as a team to provide care for patients who were
experiencing a combination of physical and mental health issues.  Reist et al. (2022) reviewed
over 80 research trials that supported the collaborative care model resulting in signiﬁcantly
better clinical outcomes, greater patient and provider satisfaction, and reduced stigma around
mental health.
Research and review of collaborative care indicate this approach, like in the medical
environment, works well in the school setting to improve access to behavioral health and other
community services for children and adolescents (Lyons et al., 2019).
The goal is to provide holistic treatment and prevention for all of a student's needs.
Collaborative care is a structured system of shared planning, decision-making, goal setting, and
assumption of responsibilities by a team of educators, behavioral health, and mental health
providers working together cooperatively and with open communication. 
Flip the cards below to review the core objectives of
collaborative care.
Integration of Services: 

Integrating mental health personnel
into the academic setting thereby
improving access to behavioral
health interventions for children
and adolescents.
Consistent Collaboration: 

Coordinating continuous, and
consistent collaboration of mental
health personnel with school
personnel, students, and their
families, to optimize the
effectiveness of academic and
school behavioral health support
and resources.
A successful collaborative care system in the school setting combines effective teaming,
To improve outcomes for student
alignment with existing MTSS practices, along with strong communicative relationships. How
academic and mental health and
do these components serve to provide comprehensive, coordinated, and student-centered
wellbeing by treating the whole
support? Here is a breakdown:
student and whole family, focusing
Effective Teaming
on student and family
empowerment.
Collaborative care teams are responsible for developing and implementing comprehensive
support, responding to the diverse needs of students and families effectively. Review the aspects
of teaming and implementation below.
Creating a collaborative team: Educators, behavioral health providers and mental
health practitioners, including a designated case manager, form the core team. This
allows for the effective integration of services for students with multiple needs.
Utilizing Existing Resources: Existing school personnel or pre-established teams
address student needs. Emphasizing and optimizing available resources and
provider partnerships is most efficient.
Student and Family Engagement: Involve students and families in intervention
planning when suitable. Caregiver involvement varies based on factors like age,
developmental level, and need.
effective Communication: Facilitate consistent communication among team
members and external providers. Coordinate and track input and requests for
assistance within and outside the school.
Administrative Support and Supervision: Provide administrative support and
supervision to ensure smooth operation.
Continuous Review and Adaptation: Regularly review intervention approaches and
outcomes. Consider new approaches or team training when necessary.
Alignment with Existing MTSS framework 

Along with the key aspects mentioned above, collaborative care, building on the tiered service
delivery systems already in place in many schools, includes evidence-based interventions, data-
informed decision-making, and accountability for better student outcomes in academics,
behavior and social emotional wellbeing. In the school building, this looks like:
Evidence-based care: The collaborative care team develops, and updates evidence-based
intervention plans speciﬁcally addressing the targeted goals and outcomes for the student.
offer student and family education about academic behavioral and mental health concerns,
interventions, and strategies.
Data-informed decision-making in the form of:
Population-based care: The care team tracks a deﬁned group of students to ensure no
student "falls through the cracks." Students experiencing academic, behavioral, social,
and emotional issues can be identiﬁed through universal screening. Students can also be
referred to services by families, students, educators, other school personnel or outside
providers. After identiﬁcation, the care team systematically follows up with these students.
It allows for a more comprehensive and proactive response to the diverse needs of the
student population within the school setting. 
Measurement-based intervention: This means that support plans clearly deﬁne goals and
are measured routinely. The team tracks progress using aggregate data to inform and be on
alert when changes are needed. Teaming and regular consultation with mental and
behavioral specialists ensures interventions are effective.
Systematic case review and consultation: This includes weekly caseload reviews for
students not improving, speciﬁc recommendations from data collection, and more in-
depth assessments when necessary.  This allows the team to efficiently and effectively
adjust support as needed.
Accountability: The team evaluates provider and program-level outcomes for quality
improvement.
Relationship Building 

Arguably most important, collaborative care involves building strong relationships between the
student, the family, and the service providers, emphasizing student and family involvement in
decision-making. With the priority being to respond to student and family needs effectively,
collaborative care fosters mutual respect, trust, and open communication among all
stakeholders. Consistent and strong relationships within the collaborative care team are
essential for long-term success and facilitate consistent:
Student Engagement: Developing positive relationships with students is essential for
engaging them in the process of addressing their behavioral and mental health concerns.
When students feel valued and supported by the school staff, they are more likely to
participate in interventions and seek help when needed.
Caregiver Involvement: When parents feel connected to the school professionals involved
in their child's care, they are more likely to actively participate in treatment planning and
follow through with recommendations.
Information Sharing: effective relationship building promotes open and transparent
information sharing among team members. 
Collaboration between educators, school-employed mental health staff, and community-based
mental health professionals has been shown to improve absenteeism, office disciplinary
referrals, academic achievement, and behavioral health outcomes (Bates et al., 2019). As you can
see, when adapted for use in schools, collaborative care efforts contribute to improving the
quality of services and student access to support for all their needs.
Now that you have a better understanding of collaborative care, take a moment to reﬂect on the
effectiveness of the system.  Ask yourself these questions...
Does your school implement collaborative care or is there another coordinated system in place?
If yes, is it effective?
If you answered no, contemplate what a collaborative care model could look like in your school
building. Below are two resources that may be useful as you consider a
collaborative care system in your school.
Collaborative Care in Schools: Enhancing Integration and Impact in Youth Mental Health
Implementation of a School Mental Health Learning Collaborative Model to Support Cross-Sector
Collaboration
Case Management 

Organizing and Monitoring Individualized Services for Students
Establishing streamlined processes for Tier 3 mental health services is an essential part of the
MTSS framework. Schools should be ready to promptly plan and implement services when
needs arise. Collaborative care systems play a pivotal role in facilitating these efforts, with case
management as a key component. Let's review details about case management and the role of a
case manager in the school setting.
Deﬁning Case Management 

Trying to deﬁne case management is not as easy as it may sound. But let's go through some
broad deﬁnitions that have been used over time.
Planning and coordinating a package of health and social services that is
individualized to meet a particular client s needs.
- Moore, 1990, p. 444
A  process or method for ensuring that  individuals  are provided with
whatever services they need in a coordinated, effective, and efficient manner.
- Intagliata, 1981
Helping people whose lives have become unproductive due to the presence of
many problems that require assistance from several helpers at once.
- Ballew and Mink, 1996, p. 3
Monitoring, tracking and providing support to a client, throughout the course
of his/her treatment and after
- Ogborne and Rush, 1983, p. 136
Assisting and  individual  in re-establishing an awareness of internal
resources such as intelligence, competence, and problem-solving abilities;
establishing and negotiating lines of operation and communication between
the  individual  and external resources; and advocating with those external
resources in order to enhance the continuity, accessibility, accountability, and
e ciency of those resources.
- Rapp et al., 1992, p. 83
Assess ing  the needs of the client and the client s family, when appropriate,
and arranging, coordinating, monitoring, evaluating, and advocating for a
package of multiple services to meet the speciﬁc client s complex needs.
- National Association of Social Workers, 1992, p. 5
Surprisingly, there is no exclusive widely accepted deﬁnition of case management. But we all
can agree that case management is a support process that cuts across several different human
service systems, including education, all of which share common populations of children and
adolescents who are experiencing difficulties.
In the school setting, case management is the process of coordinating, planning and
monitoring supports and services inside and outside of school to meet the individual needs of
students who may be struggling in multiple areas.
Flip each card to unlock some of the major aspects of
case management.
Build Relationships: 

The case management process
begins with establishing trust
and relationship building. It is
centered on supporting the
student and family.
Identity Needs: 

The primary objective in this
process is to identify a student's
dif culties, their strengths and
interests, and any potential risks to
success. While every student goes
through an initial needs assessment
process, it's important to reassess
over time as needs and
circumstances often change.
Plan Supports: 

Case management involves a
system of coordinating intervention
that is timely, effective, ef cient,
and equitable. Service planning
establishes goals for students and
the actions that will be taken to
meet those goals. Goals should
include specific data measures that
will be used to assess a student s
progress.
Monitor Progress: 

A consistent system of follow-up on
implementation practices and
outcomes should be in place. Case
management involves continuously
monitoring and evaluating a
student s progress via the data
measures de ned in the service
planning stage.
The case management approach is about transforming lives through individualized care and
services to help students meet their goals. Adapting information from 'Using a Case
Management Approach to Increase Student Success in the K-12 Setting' (NABITA.org, 2023),
let's look at the steps to implementing a successful case management process in the school
setting.
Implementing a Successful Case Management System
Designed to help students meet their goals, case management is an efficient,
individualized system of coordinated care.
Let's review the steps to creating such a system.
Step 1
Develop and maintain a consistent process for the identification of students in needs.
As mentioned, identiﬁcation of needs is a primary aspect of case management.
Schools should develop both a data-driven system as well as a person based system to
identify personally and academically at risk students. Data driven referrals would
include students with high rates of discipline problems, poor attendance, struggling
academically, etc. A person based referral system includes receiving reports from
concerned parties when they recognize that a student is experiencing  personal,
emotional, or behavioral difficulty.
Step 2
Coordinate a system for connecting students to trained staff. 

Schools must have a system for connecting identiﬁed students with a designated
trained staff member for 1:1 support. Working with students individually, the sta
member should focus on building rapport, collect holistic information about the
student's needs and strengths, and develop an action plan for support.
Step 3
Build a network. 

One of the most important functions of the school case management system is
making requests for assistance from community mental health or other services. But
linking students and families to resources goes beyond merely providing them with a
referral list of available resources. Build a network of formal and informal resources
and relationships.  A designated case manager would serve as a conduit to developing
relationships and rapport with appropriate resources and community providers.
Step 4
Promote consistent communication with key stakeholders. 

A case management system serves to  bring together key stakeholders to increase
collaboration and communication. This includes providing guidance to all those who
are concerned about or who have made a referral for a student. A case management
system is partnering with treatment providers, communicating with parents, and
working with teachers and other school administrators to ensure continuity of care
across all of the student's areas of interaction and impact.
Step 5
Address systemic issues by investing in improving the overall
school climate. 

A case management approach addresses student issues at both the individual and the
systemic level. Implement school-wide campaigns aimed at improving student
mental health, decreasing bullying behaviors, and improving students' willingness to
seek help for themselves and others.
As mentioned in step 3 above, the case management process includes a designated sta
member to orchestrate care and advocacy for each student's individual needs  coordinating
and collaborating with students, parents, and staff to promote ease of access to school
academic, behavioral and mental health support, community services and resources.  The case
manager is an important part of the collaborative care system. School personnel who have
existing expertise working across systems and integrating physical health, behavioral health,
and education individuals such as school social workers, school nurses, school counselors, or
school psychologists may serve well as case managers. Below we examine the role and
responsibilities of a case manager.
The Role of the Case Manager 

Two women smiling
To streamline and expedite the delivery of appropriate services, MTSS teams may establish a
primary contact, the case manager, for each student requiring support in multiple areas and
their family. Expectations of the case manager are vast and vary based on the school's needs
and available resources.
Flip through the cards to review details of the general
expectations for case managers within a school setting
(Ballew & Mink, 1986).  
Engagement 
  
Securing parental permission
and involvement
Clarifying roles
Negotiating expectations
Planning 

Matching different family
and child needs with
available resources
Considering the likely
impediments to using
available resources
2 of 6
Recognizing student and
family strengths
Identifying common
outcomes as goals
Specifying short-term
objectives designed to
achieve the goals
Developing a coordinated
action plans that outline
tasks, responsibilities, and
timelines
Accessing Resources 

Connecting the student
with the needed school and
community resources
Empowering the family to
maintain connections with
school and community
resources
Negotiating working
relationships between the
Disengaging 

Maintaining ongoing
communication between
student, family, case
manager, and resource
Evaluating to determine
helpers
the extent to which goals
Monitoring implementation
have been achieved
of the coordinated action
Evaluating the extent of
plan
empowerment achieved by
parents to assume case
management roles
Establishing a step-by-step
transition plan
6 of 6
The case manager in some schools may have other responsibility and direct involvement with
implementing services.  These will vary from school to school and are dependent upon the
speciﬁc discipline and expertise of the case manager.
Sharing Case Management Responsibilities 

Some schools will have a dedicated staff member to manage services. However it may be more
practical in other schools to share the role, distributing the responsibilities of case
management between multiple individuals.
What does shared responsibility look like? 

The team works together to problem-solve concerns across content areas academic,
behavioral and mental health at the classroom level, and all tiers in conjunction with
interventionists and student caregivers to develop and monitor appropriate support and
services for students in need.
A team sharing case management duties, which may consist of instructional coaches,
department leads, team leaders, counselors, mental health practitioners, and behavioral
support personnel, commits to equitably and effectively fulﬁlling the following responsibilities:
Lead the team's collaborative problem-solving meetings
Lead review of academic, behavioral, social and emotional concerns to determine
the root cause at the classroom level
Review progress monitoring data at regular intervals to inform instruction,
interventions and support
Monitor implementation and ﬁdelity of intervention delivery
Document strategies, referrals, and intervention plans (in a district system)
Maintain communication with caregivers on student progress
Maintain community relationships and links to resources
That might sound easier said than done, right? No worries  Download the PDF below to see one
example of how a school designated roles and responsibilities, including case management
duties, within their MTSS team.
Tier-2-3-Team-Roles-and-Responsibilities.pdf
66.6 KB
Remember this is just one example. Your case management process will depend on your schools
staffng and resources. What is most important is the team working together to ensure
continuity of care when students are experiencing complex and/or multiple problems.
Students raising their hands in class
Whether a dedicated case manager, or a team sharing the case management responsibilities,
developing a streamline process of coordinating services signiﬁcantly improves
communication and resource access. Connecting supports across academic, behavioral and
mental health services, the case management approach positively impacts outcomes for
students and their families.
Wraparound 

Collaborative Support for Students Experiencing Intensive
Behavioral and Emotional difficulties
When children have chronic and severe emotional or behavioral health diagnoses, their families
may need assistance keeping their children in their home, school, or community. Ten percent
of all children and adolescents in the United States, about 7 million total, are estimated to have
serious emotional disorders (Williams, et.al 2018). 
There are systems of collaboration and case management that have been developed to help
schools assist students in situations of severe emotional and behavioral need. Community
partners such as the South Carolina Continuum of Care offer programming that schools and
families can turn to in such cases. One widely used program is called Wraparound. A team-
based, collaborative case management approach, Wraparound provides an example of multiple
organizations working together to provide a holistic program of support.
The Wraparound Process 

Wraparound is a team-based care planning approach that builds upon strengths to identify
appropriate formal and informal supports to address needs and also root causes of student
challenges. The Wraparound process involves a partnership with the student and their family. A
wraparound facilitator works with the family to build their wraparound team  an
interdisciplinary team of service providers, community members, friends, and other supports
that work together to create a comprehensive, individualized, and creative plan of care. With the
help of the team, the family and student take the lead in deciding team vision and goals. Team
members work together to put the plan into action, monitor how well it's working, and make
changes as needed.
Let's explore the Principles of the Wraparound Process
(adapted from nwic.org, 2023).
Family and student perspectives are intentionally elicited and prioritized during all phases of the
wraparound process.
Team members work cooperatively and share responsibility for developing, implementing, monitoring,
and evaluating a single wraparound plan. The plan reflects a blending of team members  perspectives,
mandates, and resources. The plan guides and coordinates each team member s work towards achieving
the family s long-term vision . And finally, the team ties the goals and strategies of the wraparound plan to
observable or measurable indicators of success, monitors progress towards these goals, and revises the
plan accordingly.
A wraparound team does not give up on, blame, or reject children, youth, and their families. When faced
with challenges or setbacks, the team continues working towards achieving the goals in the wraparound
plan.
The wraparound process demonstrates respect for and builds on the values, preferences, beliefs, culture,
and identity of the student, their family, and their community.
To achieve the goals laid out in the wraparound plan, the team develops and implements a customized set
of strategies, supports, and services.
Wraparound encourages the full participation of family members  networks of interpersonal and
community relationships, and the care plan reflects activities and interventions that draw on sources of
natural support.
The wraparound process and the plan of care identify, build on, and enhance the capabilities, knowledge,
skills, and assets of the student and family, their community, and other team members
Planning is grounded in family members  perspectives and input. The team strives to provide options and
choices such that the plan reflects family values and preferences.
The Wraparound approach ensures that strategies are tailored to the unique strengths and
needs of each student, leading to more relevant and successful interventions.  Addressing
outcomes in multiple life domains through a single comprehensive plan and a commitment to
long-term planning promotes a cohesive and coordinated approach to care.
To learn more about Wraparound, download the
resources below
NATIONAL WRAPAROUND INITIATIVE (NWI)
Wraparound Basics or What Is Wraparound: An
Introduction
This page introduces Wraparound, a completely different way of responding
when children or youth experience serious mental health or behavioral
challenges.
READ MORE NATIONAL WRAPAROUND INITIATIVE (NWI) 
SCYAP
Wraparound Services
WRAP services are therapeutic activities and treatment interventions provided
to youth with behavioral health and other special needs.
READ MORE SCYAP 
Two hands bringing to puzzle pieces together
Wraparound in Schools
A student's wraparound plan can be used to organize and blend positive behavior support and
academic interventions as needed to ensure success at school.
Schools can use the principles and practices of wraparound for developing a continuum of
supports and services for all students. The wraparound process can also be integrated into
existing systems of school-wide positive behavior supports.
Elevate Support Practices in Your School
Case Management That Promotes Cultural Competence, Equity and
Inclusive Practices
Incorporating Cultural Competence into Case Management 

A diverse group of children standing in front of a colorful world map
We reviewed the importance of culturally competent skills and supportive training in the ﬁrst
lesson of this course.  This is equally critical to the successful coordination of services for
students and their families.
Becoming culturally competent is a developmental process involving self-awareness,
understanding others from a cultural frame of reference, and acquiring the skills to provide
culturally relevant and culturally sensitive practice. These skills can serve to eliminate barriers
in language, communication and family engagement. This can promote acceptance of resources
and most importantly consistent participation in interventions
Review these principles for improving cultural
competence (SAMSHA, 2014). And download the pdf
below for your resource library.
The focus of cultural competence, in practice, has historically been on
individual providers. However, counselors will not be able to sustain culturally
responsive treatment without their organization s (school's) commitment to
support and allocate resources to promote these practices.
An understanding of race, ethnicity, and culture (including one s own) is
necessary to appreciate the diversity of human dynamics and to treat all clients
effectively. 
Incorporating cultural competence into treatment improves therapeutic
decision-making and offers alternative ways to deﬁne and plan a treatment
program that is ﬁrmly directed toward progress and recovery as deﬁned by
both the counselor and the client. 
Consideration of culture is important at all levels of operation individual,
programmatic, and organizational and across behavioral health treatment
settings. It is also important in all activities (including research and education)
and at every treatment phase--outreach, initial contact, screening, assessment,
placement, treatment, and continuing care and recovery support. 
Achieving cultural competence in an organization requires the participation of
racially and ethnically diverse groups and underserved populations in the
development and implementation of culturally responsive practices, program
structure and design, treatment strategies and approaches, and sta
professional development. 
Public advocacy of culturally responsive practices can increase trust among the
community, agency, and staff. The community is thus empowered with a voice
in organizational operations. 
SAMHSA
Loading
VIEW ON SAMHSA 
Promoting Equity and Inclusive Practices 

Page 1 of 341A TreATmenT ImprovemenT proTocolImproving CulturalCompetencePage1/341 Diverse group of children smiling
It is arguably one of the most important responsibilities of the mental health case manager or
case management team to ensure equity and inclusive practices in all aspects of the care
management system.
School behavioral health teams can ensure that every student has the opportunity to be as
healthy as possible by:
improving access to mental and behavioral health care
promoting quality mental and behavioral health programs and practices
reducing persistent disparities in mental health and substance use services for
underserved populations and communities.
Ways to foster an inclusive and informed school climate 

Promote an inclusive environment that encourages involvement as well as equal
access.
Consider how to communicate about children and adolescent mental health in ways
that those who are not mental health professionals can understand.
Provide strategies and tools including coaching to make sure that teachers,
principals, parents, caregivers, and key stakeholders learn what you would like
them to know about school mental health and student wellness.
Be knowledgeable and able to identify (expose) bias in discipline practices, school
policies, and student outcomes. This includes, bias by race and  bias distributed
across identity such as gender, sexuality, class, ability, etc.
The list is long, but the point is, schools (with access to almost the entire population of children
and teens ) can and should identify and implement strategies to eliminate bias and promote
equity for all students.
Social justice is woven into key elements of the Code of Professional Conduct
for Case Managers... speciﬁcally the emphasis on the dignity and worth of each
individual and consistently high standards for integrity, ﬁdelity, and
objectivity.
- The Commission for Case Manager Certification (CCMC)
See the complete Case Manager Code of Conduct below.
CCMCERTIFICATION
Loading
VIEW ON CCMCERTIFICATION 
Great work
Let's review the lesson.
Collaborative care is a structured system of shared planning, decision-making, goal
setting, and assumption of responsibilities by a team of educators, behavioral
health, and mental health providers working together cooperatively and with open
communication.   
Collaborative care involves effective teaming, and relationship building and aligns
with existing an MTSS framework.
Page 1 of 19CODE OFPROFESSIONAL CONDUCTfCASEMANAGERSPage1/19 Case management is an important component of collaborative care. It includes the
process of coordinating, and monitoring supports and services inside and outside
of school to meet the individual needs of students who may be struggling in
multiple areas.
To carry out case management responsibilities, some schools will have a dedicated
staff member to manage services. Other schools will rely on case management as a
process where existing school personnel will share the role, distributing the
responsibilities of case manager between multiple individuals.
Wraparound services are an example of multiple organizations working together
collaboratively to provide a holistic program of support for students with severe
emotional issues. The principles of Wraparound can be used in schools to develop a
continuum of supports and services for all students
It is the responsibility of the mental health case manager or case management team
to provide culturally relevant and culturally sensitive practice. Also, to ensure equity
and inclusive practices in all aspects of support services for students and their
families.
Inclusive Treatment Planning
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
***** Inclusive Treatment Planning 
Outcomes:
1.  Describe the key components of a treatment plan
2. Identify and explain the importance of key partners in the collaborative development of
treatment plans in the Multi-Tiered System of Supports framework
3. Describe common challenges and strategies for engaging families in the development
of treatment plans
4. Describe the advantages and disadvantages of labeling in treatment planning
5. differentiate between strengths-based and deﬁcit-based language in the development
and facilitation of treatment plans
The Essentials of Treatment Planning 

What is Treatment Planning?
Imagine a classroom where every student is unique, each with their own strengths, challenges,
and personal experiences. In this diverse and dynamic setting, it's essential that you, as mental
health providers, provide treatments to students who need Tier 3 supports, and adopt a
comprehensive and inclusive approach to support every student. One crucial aspect of this
approach is treatment planning. Now, Let's learn about what treatment planning entails, the
best practices of treatment planning, and why it's so important to provide equitable mental
health services to all students.
A pen and notepad atop a desk
Treatment planning is the development of a plan for the interventions that will be used to
treat students. Treatment planning is an essential part of clinical practice, both in and outside of
schools  Treatment planning is a process where you collaborate with students, their families,
and other stakeholders to assess needs, set goals, select tailored interventions, monitor
progress, and make necessary adjustments. The goal is to provide individualized, evidence-
based support that considers students' strengths, challenges, and cultural backgrounds.
Key Components to Treatment Planning 

There are six key components to treatment planning:
Student History
Strengths and Interests
Areas of Opportunity
Goals and Objectives
Plan of Action
Student/Family Agreement
Below is an example of a treatment planning document.
Click through the items to learn more about each key
component
Student information/history 

Student information is important in drafting treatment plans. Information can include the student s
name, age, grade level, source of referral, date, and the expected length of treatment. It is also helpful to
include information about the student s history which may involve family/medical history, prior
psychiatric diagnoses, current medical conditions, social history, or any significant life events that may
contribute to understanding the client.
Families and other collateral contacts like school counselors, school nurses, and teachers can provide
valuable insight  This offers a great opportunity to involve the family s voice in your treatment planning,
especially when working with minors.
Strengths & interests 

Strengths and interests are a great way to build a well-rounded view of your students. Sometimes, as
mental health providers or educators, it can be easy to focus on the deficits or challenges your students
may be facing. However, considering a full view of their strengths and attributes helps build rapport and
mutual respect.
Areas of opportunity 

This part of the plan explains the  why  for treatment. This may include data from assessments, feedback
from teachers or families, or a diagnosis. It is important to use respectful and inclusive language in this
section. You will learn more about that later in the lesson
SMARTIE goals 

Goals are an essential part of the treatment plan. Clarity about what is hoped to be accomplished by the
end of treatment is central to building a strong relationship and supporting the student. One way to frame
goals is by making them SMARTIE:
Specific
Measurable
Attainable
Relevant
Time-limited
Inclusive
Equitable
Goals can also be short-term and long-term; some goals might be more urgent and time-sensitive, while
others may take more time to reach. You can break goals down into shorter-term objectives. These are
smaller steps that will help meet the overall goal. It is important to always be mindful of academic and
behavioral goals given the school setting.
Plan of action 

This is the  how  of treatment. This section should describe the interventions and strategies that are
targeted to the goals of treatment. This could include the specific type of intervention or therapy used,
such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). Options for interventions will be discussed in the
"Therapeutic Practices" lesson later in this course  Another important component of the plan of action is
the description of how progress will be monitored, including how frequently progress will be assessed,
when parents/guardians will be updated, and when goals are met. 
Student/family agreement 

Another critical piece of the plan is to ensure that the student and their family are on board. In many cases,
families are legally required to agree to treatment before it can begin. This agreement on goals with the
student and families is a significant factor in building a strong relationship. Continuing a strong
relationship throughout the treatment process may help improve treatment outcomes. Ways to involve
families and students in the planning process and throughout treatment will also be discussed later in this
lesson
Treatment Planning Scenario
Let's apply what we ve learned about treatment planning to a real-world scenario  Click the link
below to download the Blank Treatment Plan PDF, then continue to the scenario.
 to Download the Blank Treatment Plan.pdf
277.2 KB
Sarah's Treatment Plan Scenario
Download the Blank Treatment Plan PDF, provided above, and
read about Sarah, a fifth grade student who seems to be
struggling in school.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 1
Continue 
 Next Slide
Have you downloaded the Blank
Treatment Plan pdf?
1
Yes- it is downloaded and I am ready for the
scenario
2
No, I have not downloaded it yet.
Scene 1 Slide 2
0 
1 
 Next Slide
 Next Slide
Sarah is a fifth grader who started the year being very open,
energetic, and excited to be at school.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 3
Continue 
 Next Slide
Recently teachers have observed quieter behavior (e.g., less
hand-raising, putting her head down in class, not talking with
friends, etc.) and lower grades in classes.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 4
Continue 
 Next Slide
Her teachers have been concerned and requested assistance from
you, the school mental health clinician.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 5
Continue 
 Next Slide
When you talk with Sarah, she mentions she has been feeling
down ever since her parents divorced last summer. She also says
she has been having difficulty sleeping  at night.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 6
Continue 
 Next Slide
Her parents say she has been irritable at home, spends most of
her time in her room, and engages with her siblings less than
before.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 7
Continue 
 Next Slide
Her mother mentions her own experience having been diagnosed
with depression when she was in college.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 8
Continue 
 Next Slide
In your conversation, you also learn Sarah is a member of the
school choir, enjoys painting in art class, and is a great caretaker
for her pets- a hamster, a beta fish, and two gerbils.
CONTINUE
Scene 1 Slide 9
Continue 
 Next Slide
How can you develop an effective and
inclusive treatment plan for Sarah?
1
2
You start by reviewing key components of mental
health treatment planning.
Tell her parents there is nothing you can do as it is
not school related.
Scene 1 Slide 10
0 
1 
 Next Slide
 Next Slide
Great job
Now that you've reviewed key components of treatment
planning, you can complete the downloaded plan template on
your own using this scenario  When you are done, keep going to
learn about other plans
START OVER
Scene 1 Slide 11
Continue 
 End of Scenario
Unique Plans in the School Setting 

Understanding and Implementing Specialized Plans for Academic
and Emotional Success 
As a school based mental health provider, or an educator, Let's reiterate your goal in the school
setting: to create a safe and supportive environment for every student where they can thrive
academically and emotionally. Remember at the beginning of the lesson it was mentioned that
no two students are alike and their needs can vary signiﬁcantly. Therefore, in your ongoing
e ort to provide the best possible support, there are a range of specialized plans designed to
address students  unique needs. These plans include interventions and accommodations,
including behavior intervention plans, functional behavioral assessments, individualized
education plans, and 504 plans. 
Let's explore various types of plans relating to student mental health that you may see in the
school setting. Some of these focus on treatment, while others focus on accommodations and
supports. Importantly, students can qualify for more than one of these plans, as well as mental
health treatment plans, at the same time. Check out this video for information about these
plans
Let's further explore these plans in detail through
written content. 
Functional Behavioral Assessments (FBA) and Behavior Intervention Plans (BIP) 

Behavior intervention plans (BIPs) are a broad category of behavior plans that aim to reduce
challenging behaviors. BIPs can be used for students with or without mental health conditions or
disabilities. They can be applied to any student to support positive behavior and to make any
changes to the learning environment to prevent problem behavior and support prosocial
behavior. BIPs are typically more formal and speciﬁc legal documents, often written by special
education teachers, behavioral specialists, or other school mental health clinicians.
On the other hand, informal behavior plans, while sharing similar goals with BIPs, offer greater
ﬂexibility in their approach and implementation. These informal plans may be developed
collaboratively among educators, counselors, and the student's support team. They may not
follow the same rigid legal requirements as BIPs but still serve as valuable tools for addressing
behavioral challenges in a student-centered way. Remember that if a student has an IEP, then the
BIP becomes a part of that document.
Both BIPs and behavior plans are informed by Functional Behavioral Assessments (FBAs). FBAs
are a method to gather information on problem behavior, such as triggers for the behavior and
any consequences that may keep the behavior happening at school. Data on the frequency,
duration, or intensity of the behavior may also be gathered. This information is then analyzed and
used to inform decisions about intervention strategies and possible replacement behaviors.
These plans will likely include: 
information about the student
the area of behavior being targeted
the function of the behavior
strategies to address the behavior, including, but not limited to, replacement behaviors,
positive reinforcement, and environmental changes.
These plans may take many different forms and may vary from school to school. The plans may
also vary depending on the goals.
Individualized Education Plans 

Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) are deﬁned by federal law. The Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA) outlines rights and educational mandates for students aged 3-21 with
disabilities. IEPs outline the services, accommodations, and goals for each student with a
disability. To qualify for an IEP, students must qualify for at least one of the 13 conditions outlined
by IDEA:
Speciﬁc learning disability including disability in the area of reading ﬂuency, reading
comprehension, math calculation, written expression, etc. 
Other health impairments can include ADHD 
Autism spectrum disorder 
Emotional disturbance includes depression, anxiety, etc. 
Speech-language impairment 
Visual impairment 
Deaf/hard of hearing
Deaf-blindness
Orthopedic impairment 
Intellectual disability 
Traumatic brain injury 
Multiple disabilities 
Developmental delay
IEPs are developed by a team of professionals (e.g., special education teachers, families, students,
general education teachers). The exact forms and procedures for IEPs can vary by district and by
school, but they all address the student's current functioning level, set annual goals, specify
services, deﬁne participation with non-disabled peers, and outline transition services for
students over the age of 13. It is extremely important for everyone involved to agree on the details
of the plan. Failure to adequately prepare or follow an IEP could result in legal action against the
school parents can ﬁle complaints, pursue mediation, and, if not resolved, ﬁle lawsuits. 
504 Plans 

504 plans are another way for schools to support students. These plans are based on Section 504
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a civil rights law for providing equal opportunities
to people with disabilities.
Unlike IEPs, 504 plans primarily focus on accommodations to level the playing ﬁeld for students.
Both plans involve collaborative development with input from families, administrators, teachers,
and mental health professionals. While IEPs encompass specialized instruction to address
academic and behavioral deﬁcits, 504 plans concentrate on accommodations.
Schools designate 504 coordinators to manage these plans, while case managers typically
oversee IEPs. Notably, 504 plans have broader eligibility criteria, encompassing anyone with a
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities. Students may qualify
for either an IEP or a 504 plan but not both concurrently.
504 plans extend beyond ages 3-18. People with disabilities can request accommodations at any
federally funded educational institution, including universities. The guidelines for this are
explained further here:
ED
Protecting Students With Disabilities
Introduction   Interrelationship of IDEA and Section 504   Protected Students 
Evaluation   Placement   Procedural Safeguards   Terminology This document
is a revised version of a document originally developed by the Chicago office of
the office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the U.S.
READ MORE ED 
You can also visually explore the distinctions and
connections between these plans by examining the
following chart.
A chart differentiating the types of plans
Key Partners in Treatment Planning 

Building Strong Partnerships: The Role of Families in Treatment
Planning 
Let's look at some of the similarities and differences between various settings and providers
that may use treatment plans.
First, review what treatment planning teams in a Multi-tiered System of Supports framework
might look like.
Click on each tab below to learn more about the
treatment planning team members.
School-based Clinicians 

School-based mental health clinicians may include school psychologists, school counselors,
guidance counselors, or other mental health professionals practicing in the school setting. They
can:
Gather data to inform treatment plans
Facilitate the writing and implementation of these plans
Provide support to other school personnel for student mental health issues.
General Education Teachers 

General education teachers are valuable sources of information about students in the classroom.
They can provide insight about academic goals, as well as strengths and challenges students may
be experiencing in the classroom.
It is also important for teachers to have an awareness of mental health challenges their students
may be facing and how to best support them. For some plans, teachers may also help implement
accommodations or some of the plan s action steps. Teachers may also make requests for
assistance for school-based mental health services. Remember that general education teachers
also implement accommodations on IEPs and 504 plans.
Special Education Teachers 

Special education teachers, with the rest of the team, develop IEPs, BIPs, and other interventions.
They can also provide valuable information about students in the classroom. They may also
support other treatment team members, like general education teachers, in implementing
accommodations and treatment plans.
Behavioral Specialists 

Behavioral specialists can also participate in developing BIPs and 504 plans, as well as assist other
treatment team members in implementation. They can provide a unique perspective informed by
their expertise in behavior management.
School Administrators 

School administrators are important to include in treatment planning teams as they may have
input about school policies and resources that can be used to best support students. Like teachers,
they may also make requests for assistance for students. School administrators frequently serve
as the local education agency (LEA) representative for IEP and 504 meetings, due to their
knowledge of available school and district resources (school psychologists are the only other
school staff who can serve as LEA representatives).
Families 

Families are essential to include in treatment planning teams. Families can provide information
about a student's background and history, observe their behavior at home, and can even partner
in the implementation of treatment plans. You will learn more the importance of involving
families later in the lesson.
What is a  request for assistance? 

Requests for assistance are similar to what is often called a  referral for services.  Using
the term  request for assistance  is more reffective of the collaborative approach used in
MTSS. In particular, a request for assistance conveys that the person with an initial concern
about a student stays with the process until the student is connected to the appropriate
level of support/intervention within the MTSS.
Student and Family Privacy and Conﬁdentiality 

Conﬁdentiality is important to consider in the context of treatment planning, especially when
working on a team with multiple professionals. Conﬁdentiality is fundamental to developing a
trusting relationship. As mental health professionals, however, you may face instances in which
you are required to share information, particularly for issues of health and safety. Two key laws
cover conﬁdentiality in school mental health: HIPAA and FERPA. HIPAA is typically applied in
private treatment settings. Most schools are covered by FERPA, but each school may be different
 check with your school to be sure you are compliant with their policy and ensure you stay up-
to-date on federal guidelines.
Review the federal guidelines in the link below.
ED
Joint Guidance on the Application of FERPA and HIPAA
to Student Health Records
The U.S. Department of Education and the office for Civil Rights at the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services released updated joint guidance
addressing the application of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA) Privacy Rule to records maintained on students.
READ MORE ED 
While treatment planning teams involve a range of professionals, it is impossible to overstate
the critical role that families play in the process. Families are not just a part of the team; they are
often the heart of it. Let's now shift the focus to explore the valuable contributions of families in
the treatment planning process and how their involvement shapes the path to success. 
Involving Families 

A father, mother, and a daughter
Family involvement is essential to the success of students in school and in treatment. As
discussed in earlier lessons, family involvement in the school is a key component of MTSS at
both the Tier 1 and Tier 2 levels. Family involvement is also extremely important in Tier 3
interventions.
As you saw earlier, parent/guardian approval is required for the beginning of treatment plans,
but is also incredibly important in building strong and impactful relationships. These
relationships can be a key strategy for increasing the effectiveness of treatment and helping
students reach their full potential (Christenson, 2019). 
Common Challenges in Family Engagement
Engagement with families is an essential part of planning treatment.
Families can provide valuable insight, support, and
recommendations in the facilitation of treatment. However, various
barriers can interfere with family involvement.
Let's explore some barrries.
Scheduling 

One difficulty with engaging  students' families is scheduling. Families may only be available outside of
regular school hours or have very limited availability. Combining this with busy provider schedules, it can
be challenging to find common ground.
Transportation and Childcare 

Another logistical challenge can be a family s access to transportation and childcare. Some families may
not have cars or the ability to drive, and public transit may be unavailable to them, making it difficult to
get to school. Some families may also be concerned about childcare and unable to leave their homes for
this reason.
Lack of Resources 

Resources can impact a school s ability to effectively collaborate with families, and a family s ability to
interact with the school. This can show up in many different ways, such as issues of transportation and
childcare discussed previously. There may also be challenges with school resources, such as low numbers
of available staff, limited time, and limited budgets. These barriers can make engaging with families more
difficult. 
Lack of Trust 

There may be ruptures in trust between the school and families for various reasons. Negative past
experiences, from both the provider and family perspective, can damage relationships. Parents may have
also had negative school experiences when they were students. Thus, schools may not be a place they seek
out. Prior communication problems may also make families more wary of connecting with the school,
and vice versa.
Stereotyping 

Stereotyping can be damaging for both families and school staff members. Families may stereotype
providers, and providers may also stereotype families. Sometimes, these can be implicit biases that
happen without our intention or awareness. It is important to reflect on stereotypes and biases and the
role they may play in school-family interactions.
Language Barriers 

Communication is key to family involvement, and language differences can be a big challenge to
overcome. One requirement of IDEA is that translators be used if requested by parents whenever possible.
It is important to utilize resources to help facilitate communication across different languages.
Click through the  ashcards below to look at some
strategies to get past the barriers that can interfere with
family involvement.
Addressing Barriers 

This involves problem-solving
with families openly about
potential barriers to their
involvement. Here, it is
important to be  exible and
adjust where possible to meet
the needs of the family. For
example, if a parent has a
dif cult time with
transportation to the school,
Rapport Builing 

Positive relationships with
families are key in promoting
their involvement. Building
rapport can begin from the  rst
interaction with the family, and
can be supported through
exibility, positive regard, and
empathetic listening. One
technique for building rapport
is to build on connections that
Mental Health Education
Helping families understand
their child s mental health
condition(s) and potential
interventions can also help
facilitate their involvement,
particularly if anyone in the
family holds negative
stereotypes about mental
health. Addressing stigma
directly can help families and
Motivational Strategies
Motivational interviewing is
another way to support
involvement with families.
Before beginning treatment, it
is important to instill hope in the
family, using a non-
confrontational approach. This
can also help to address
negative perceptions that the
family may have about
Assessment and Data-Driven Feedback 

Sharing data and assessment
results with families is another
way to promote their
involvement. Sharing this
information can also help set
positive expectations and instill
hope before and during
treatment. For example, if a
student is using a behavior
intervention plan, showing
Cultural Acknowledgement 

Cultural acknowledgment is
essential in building positive
relationships and a strong
rapport from the start of
treatment planning through all
stages of treatment. Being
inclusive, understanding, and
acknowledging and respecting
cultural differences can lead to
stronger relationships and
For more information and resources about family
engagement, explore the Family-School Community
Alliance's.
FSCA 

Proactively reach out to families to establish family-school partnerships
Empower families to reach out to professionals to engage with them in
partnership Engage families, community, and educators to identify priorities,
plan, and share in decision-making and evaluation COVID-19 Resources
Twitter feed is not available at the moment. COOKIE NOTICE.
READ MORE FSCALLIANCE 
After you use what you've learned to work through three examples of overcoming barriers to
family involvement, you ll learn more about Hart s Ladder of Participation, a way you can
conceptualize family involvement
Effectively Engaging with Families
Enhancing Treatment
Hart s Ladder of Participation
One way to consider your collaboration is by using Hart s Ladder. Hart s Ladder was originally
designed to describe child involvement in projects with adults, but it can also be applied in a
school behavioral health setting to describe the varying levels of involvement between school
treatment teams and their families.
Click on the graphic below to discover more about the
Ladder of Participation.
Level 1: Manipulation 

At the lowest level of the ladder families lack consent. Families and students do not have the course of
treatment explained to them and are not asked for consent. This constitutes an abuse of power; there is no
input into treatment at this level.
Level 2: Decoration 

This is the next level and involves a deficient level of participation. At this stage, students and families are
given some, but not all, information. Families are asked for consent at this level, but they are not involved
in any decision-making.
Level 3: Tokenism 

This level also gives very limited voice to the students and families receiving services, with little
opportunities for feedback or participation in decision-making. They are, however, given most
information and an opportunity to provide or refuse consent.
Level 4: Assigned but Informed 

Families partially participate at Level 4. Families and students are given all information and given a chance
to describe their viewpoints.
Level 5: Consulted and Informed 

At this level, family and student voices are considered in decision-making. Information is shared across all
parties, and decisions are made collaboratively. 
Level 6: School-initiated, Shared Decisions 

Needs are identified by the school, and families and students make decisions around the response to those
needs. 
Level 7: Client-initiated and Directed 

Families and students identify needs and make decisions on how to meet them. 
Level 8: Client-initiated, Shared Decisions 

Families and students initiate everything, with schools as a support as needed. 
While some rungs are lower or higher than others, it doesn t necessarily mean they are better
or worse; different levels of involvement may be needed depending on the situation (e.g., young
people might not be able to entirely make their own decisions when it comes to health and
safety issues).
Rungs 1-3 involve no active participation. Avoid these  rst three rungs if possible.
Encourage active participation of all parties to gain better rapport, better outcomes, and
family and student empowerment.
Strengths-Based vs. Deﬁcit Based Language 

When developing treatment plans, it is important to take care in choosing language to describe
difficulties students may face. In these cases, what is said can be undermined by how it is said. It
is important to use language that balances the description of students' difficulties and reasons
for treatment with respectful acknowledgment of the whole person, including strengths and
positive attributes. 
Language we use matters. Communication of behaviors and diagnoses will inﬂuence how
people respond to the information and the person. This includes the students, families, and
school-wide community. 
Using empowering language helps to reduce stigma, promote growth, and positively inﬂuence
the culture around discussions of mental health  
If we ask people to look for deﬁcits, they will usually ﬁnd them, and their view of
the situation will be colored by this. If we ask people to look for successes, they
will usually ﬁnd them, and their view of the situation will be colored by this.
Ronald Kral, School Psychologist (1989)
Watch the following video about recognizing de cit-
based or strength-based language
Now that you know a little bit more about the strengths-based approach, and how it compares
to the deﬁcit-based approach, you ll review how you can use it in more detail
One question to answer as you consider a strength-based approach is: what is a strength? This
could be deﬁned in many ways.
One example, according to Park et al. (2004), is that a strength must  be ubiquitous; be
fulﬁlling; be morally valued; be trait-like; be measurable; be distinctive; be  strikingly embodied
by some individuals; be missing altogether in some individuals; be the  deliberate target of
societal practices and rituals ; not be associated with negative antonyms; and not diminish
others or invoke jealousy.  Review the ﬂashcards to see examples of traits Park & Peterson
(2008) found to meet this deﬁnition.
Wisdom and Knowledge 

creativity, curiosity, open-
mindedness, love of learning,
perspective
Humanity 

kindness, love, social
intelligence
Temperance 

forgiveness, modesty,
prudence, self-regulation
Transcendence 

appreciation of beauty,
gratitude, hope, humor,
spirituality
Justice 
 fairness, leadership, teamwork
Courage 

honesty/authenticity, bravery,
perseverance, zest
The Behavior and Emotional Rating Scale (BERS) (Epstein, 1999) is another example of a
strengths-based approach. This formal assessment that clinicians administer to measure the
level of strength across ﬁve categories, which are listed below.
Click through the tabs to learn more about these
strengths.
Interpersonal 

These strengths revolve around student s interpersonal skills, and include items such as reacting
calmly to disappointments, admitting mistakes, delaying gratiﬁcation, apologizing when wrong,
and respecting others.
Family 

These strengths revolve around students  relationships with their families. It includes behaviors
like interacting positively with parents and/or siblings, participating in family activities, and
having a sense of belonging in their family.
School 

These strengths are focused on academic skills. They include completing homework on time,
paying attention in class, studying effectively, and participating in extra-curricular activities.
Affective 

These strengths relate to students  emotional skills. Some examples include expressing affection
for others, asking for help, identifying feelings, and sharing with others. 
Intrapersonal 

These strengths are part of the student s understanding of themselves. They include having self-
conﬁdence, identifying personal strengths, asserting oneself, and expressing a positive outlook
on life.
While both of these approaches provide examples of strengths that you may want to consider,
strengths don't need to come from formal models or assessments. You can uncover strengths
through casual conversations with students, input from family and friends, or input from other
school staff who know the student well. Here are some question examples to uncover a child's
strengths, but don't let these limit you
List of questions to uncover strengths
Deﬁcit-Based and Strengths-Based Cycles 

Another way of understanding the importance of deﬁcit-based versus strengths-based
language is by thinking about the cycles that are created with each approach. This model,
adapted from Hammond & Zimmerman (2012), describes the cycles that are created by both
deﬁcit-based and strengths-based models. Click images below to enlarge.
De cit-based Cycle 

The deﬁcit-based cycle begins with identifying a need for change, focusing on
deﬁcits. As discussed earlier, focusing on deﬁcits leads to labeling students, and this
labeling leads to negative expectations. When the process starts this way,
opportunities are blocked, and students are more likely to have a negative experience.
This negative experience then leads to further lowering of expectations and the
affirmation of labels. This leads to a reduction in self-esteem and more negative
behaviors, restarting the cycle.
Strengths-based Cycle 

The strengths-based cycle also begins with identifying a need for change. The
difference here is focusing on strengths instead of deﬁcits. After identifying
strengths, they are developed and used to create opportunities for change rather than
limiting them. The student has a more positive experience, which leads to positive
expectations and, ultimately, positive behaviors. Now that there are more positive
behaviors, the strengths cycle can continue with these new and built-up strengths.
Let's review the lesson.
Treatment plans are ways to plan the interventions and course of treatment for
students
Some common plans that you might work with in a school setting include Behavior
Intervention Plans, Individualized Education Plans, and 504 Plans
When planning treatment, it is important to involve families so that everyone gets
as much out of it as possible
Strengths-based language creates a more complete view of students and involves
indicating their strengths instead of only focusing on deﬁcits
Using strengths-based language can reduce stigma and support student's self-
esteem
EXIT



***** 
Growing Your Tier 3 Supports - 1.3
Welcome to Growing Your Tier 3 Supports  In this course, you will learn about the
interventions, best practices, and implementation of Tier 3 of Multi-tiered System
of Supports (MTSS), with a focus on supporting behavioral and mental health. Like
seeds planted in a garden, growing supports at Tier 3 creates a beautiful garden
where everyone is ﬂourishing. Let's get started
Mental Health Practices and Supports
Progress Monitoring for Practitioners in Schools

@@@@@
Lesson 1 of 2
Mental Health Practices and Supports
Outcomes: 

1. Review the beneﬁts of school-based mental health
interventions
2. Analyze the difference between manual and modular
approaches to mental health interventions
3. Review evidence-based therapies for common Tier 3 needs
4. Cover the beneﬁts and implementation of telemental health
sessions
5. Be able to identify the best intervention approach for your
school 
Mental Health Interventions in Schools 

An Introduction
As you already know, youth spend most of their time in school. Their time in school plays an
important role in their emotional, moral, and cognitive development and in forming
relationships with their peers and teachers.
All these factors affect mental health.
This means that schools are critical in supporting students  mental health. We at the SBHA
know that you want schools to be promising, supportive, safe, and non-stigmatizing
environments provide mental health support and therapeutic services to students. We do too
To help the garden of Tier 3 supports ﬂourish, we want to provide you a box of readily available
gardening tools to meet the mental health needs of all students    
In this lesson, you will brieﬂy review the beneﬁts of school-based mental health interventions,
the difference between manual-based and modular based approaches, and then focus on
speciﬁc evidence-based therapeutic practices (EBTs) before looking at telemental health care  
Ready? Let's get gardening
Effective Therapeutic Practices in School Settings 

Reviewing the Value of Therapeutic Interventions within Schools
Students experience many challenges that impact their mental health. Some of these may be
diagnoses, such as Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), anxiety, depression, or
school avoidance, as well as other social, emotional, and behavioral concerns  While supports at
Tier 1 and Tier 2 may help the student ﬁnd comfort through a safe school environment or
solidarity in a student group for grief, for example, it is the individualized, intensive supports at
Tier 3 that help students ﬂourish. You may already be familiar with applying therapeutic
approaches, or some of this may be new information. Let's get started by refreshing your
knowledge about how students beneﬁt from various evidence-based therapies (EBTs)  
Flip the cards below to check out the bene ts of using
EBTs with students  
Interpersonal Skills: 

Effective therapies positively
impact students  social and
emotional skills and improve
attitudes about self and others. 
Communication Skills 
 As students learn to express their
emotions and feelings, they
become better at identifying and
communicating their needs. They
also gain active listening skills. 
Prosocial Skills: 

Therapies enhance students
behaviors, increasing their
prosocial behaviors and their
decreasing externalizing and
internalizing problems. 
Academic Outcomes: 
 
As students have success with
therapeutic services, they are more
likely to display positive attitudes
toward school and more engagement
in their school community.
At the end of the day, the youth themselves will determine if what you provide is effective.
Feedback from students can be the most encouraging part of your work  Let's hear some now. 
Youth Voices about Therapeutic Practices 

The Youth Voices website (youth.gov) asked youth about their experiences with school mental
health services.
Let's hear Justin's, Cameron's, and Megan s stories and see how they beneﬁted from different
therapeutic services provided by their school.
Cameron's responses to questions
1. How has the school mental health program impacted you?
2. How have the school mental health counselor and the services you
received made a difference for your life?
3. If this program had not been in your school, would your life be different
now?  Would it be worse?
4. What would you say was the most helpful service to you?
5. What about this experience matters to you most?
6. If a person (teacher, principal, or a counselor) asked you if the school
mental health program should be in their school, what would you say to
them?
As Justin shared, school-based mental health services help kids who really need someone to
talk to about their intense emotions, difficult family situations, and own internal conﬂicts.
Justin s own experience with a school-based mental health counselor allowed him to ﬁnd
stability at school and happier relationships with his family. Megan s story further highlights
how important school-based mental health services are. While already seeing a psychiatrist to
aid her depression through medication, Megan couldn t see her psychiatrist daily or weekly like
she could with a school-based provider  Ultimately, Cameron summed it all up when they wrote:
Everything about it matters it  puts me in a better position for the future.  
Everything about it matters it  puts me in a better position for the future.
- Cameron, 13 years old
Think about your experiences with students. What aspects of your practice do you think were
especially helpful and supportive for them? What characteristics of a therapeutic session do you
think have impacted them the most?
Most likely, your empathy, direction, and educated skills were huge supports to your students
Thus far, the emphasis has been on the meaningfulness of effective therapeutic practices for
students. Let's see how therapeutic practices within a school can beneﬁt others alongside
students
Who Else Beneﬁts from Therapeutic Practices? 

Megan, Cameron, and Justin already gave you a sneak peek on who else beneﬁts from
therapeutic practices at a school-level: families
When families are involved with their students  mental health intervention in schools, family
communication can be improved and the wellbeing of both the student and the family can
prosper (García-Carrión et al., 2019). Further, the impact of school-based mental health
interventions is present for families and students from unique cultural backgrounds (Kern et al.,
2017).
Families aren t the only ones who beneﬁt when their student is healthy and connected.
Educators do as well  Students who are mentally well are more likely to be engaged in class,
display appropriate interpersonal behavior, actively problem-solve, and contribute to an overall
healthy school climate (Youth.Gov, n.d.). Students who engage in mental health interventions at
school tend to stabilize in their academic performance, if not improving their grades or
attendance (Jameson et al., 2013). Mentally well students are typically academically and
relationally satisﬁed students (Suldo et al., 2016), which contributes to educator satisfaction
(Admiraal et al., 2019)
Understanding Behavior 

Gardening with Knowledge
You may be wondering why we ve moved from the effectiveness of mental health interventions
in a school setting to focusing on behavior. As a school-based mental health practitioner, you
already know that one of the ﬁrst alarm ﬂares a student can send is in their behavior. You also
know that one of your primary roles is supporting positive behavior  Thus, we want to review
the function of behavior before analyzing tools you have to understand, intervene, and support
positive behavior in your students  
Think of it like knowing that plants need soil, sun, and rain to grow. Knowing this justiﬁes the
purchase of potting soil and a watering can while placing a plant by an open window  To start,
Let's review the ABCs Antecedents, Behaviors, and Consequences of behavior. 
Our ABCs 

The antecedents, behaviors, and consequences (ABCs) of a students  actions, especially
ineffective or unhealthy behavior, is a helpful tool in ﬁnding patterns that pinpoint the
behavior s root cause. While ABC data can be used within behavioral interventions to support
student s mental health, Let's ﬁrst view it as an overarching cycle of how behavior functions
before looking at using ABCs
Using the arrows below, click through to learn more
about ABCs
ABC Data
Let's look at antecedents, behaviors, and consequences.
Step 1
Antecedent 

An antecedent is something that occurs before a challenging behavior; some refer to
this as a trigger. There are many potential antecedents to behavior, so it is important
to be speciﬁc and objective when describing antecedents and consider all the
possibilities. Some examples of antecedents may include being assigned classwork,
having a toy taken away, going to a certain place, having a negative interaction with
someone, transitions, and many, many others
Step 2
Behavior 

This is where the behavior occurs  As mentioned previously, it is important to be
speciﬁc and objective when describing behavior we want to avoid stigmatizing and
vague statements such as "aggressive," "hostile," "disobedient," etc. Instead, stick
to more objective and measurable behaviors, such as "hitting classmates," "using
profanity," or "throwing toys."
Step 3
Consequence 

This is the result of the behavior. What happened after the behavior? There are many
factors to include here what interactions happened, what was the child provided or
not provided access to, and who was involved? Consequences greatly impact the
likelihood of behavior happening again and help you determine the function of a
behavior.
Summary
Remember, when observing behavior of students, it's great to remember your ABCs -
Antecedents, Behaviors, and Consequences
In the ABC loop, a behavior is done to achieve a consequence. Whether it's being removed from
class before an exam due to hitting a classmate, receiving attention from peers, or getting a
special treat for exemplary behavior, a student s behavior is rarely, if ever, pointless. As a
school-based mental health practitioner, you want to encourage and respond to student s
behaviors in a way that encourages positive, healthy actions and discourages ineffective and
harmful ones. You also want the student s family to do the same for the student s behavior at
home
Click through the tabs to review ways to support or
dampen behavior, both in the school and at home. 
Positive Reinforcement 

Reinforcement is an important tool in shaping behavior, both positively and negatively.
Something is said to be reinforcing if it increases the likelihood that a behavior will occur.
Remember that for reinforcement to be most effective, it should be delivered immediately and
consistently after the desired behavior. For example, if a child completes their homework, the
teacher gives them a gold sticker. The child is excited to get this sticker, so they are more likely to
do their homework again in the future. Verbal praise can also be helpful. Suggest
parents/caregivers recognize and reinforce the behavior that they would like to see. Positive
reinforcement should be well-stated encouragement statements. For example, instead of  good
job,  recommend,  You ﬁnished your homework, great job  You can have video game time
before dinner.  This statement includes social reinforcement (attention and praise for ﬁnishing
homework), as well as a reward (video game time). 
Some more example strategies for positive reinforcement include: 
Screen time
Prizes
Access to toys
Access to preferred items
Increased attention
Playing games
Watching movies
Other preferred activities
Negative Reinforcement 

Negative reinforcement also increases the likelihood of a behavior occurring again. However, it
does this by taking away something that is undesirable. An example of this could be that a student
uses profanity when a teacher assigns them a test. The teacher then sends the student to the
office. This gets the student out of the classroom, so they don't have to take the test. This
behavior then is reinforced because the student knows that if they use profanity, they can avoid
unwanted class activities. 
Other examples of negative reinforcement include: 
Reducing demands
Providing homework passes
Reducing chores
Avoiding schoolwork 
Getting out of an undesired environment
Reducing discomfort
Positive Punishment 

Punishment is anything that reduces the likelihood of a behavior occurring again. Positive
punishment does this by adding something that is undesirable. It is important to note that it is not
recommended for positive punishments to include spanking or hitting the child, either in the
school or at home. Another disadvantage of this type of physical punishment is that it doesn t
teach the skills the child needs; it only teaches what not to do. To support positive behavior, it is
also important to provide alternate skills to children. 
Some more examples of positive punishments include: 
Assigning additional homework problems
Assigning additional chores
Flipping a card from green to red
Verbal reprimand
Negative Punishment 

Negative punishment also reduces the likelihood of a behavior occurring. However, it reduces the
likelihood by taking away something that is desired. This could look like a a parent taking away a
child's cellphone, or a student having a silent lunch period rather than talking with their friends.
Since the behavior is linked to something desired being taken away, the child is less likely to
engage in that behavior again.
Some more examples of this include: 
Active ignoring
Reducing screen time
Taking away toys
Reducing privileges
Time-outs
Environmental Modification 

Modifying the environment is a preventive strategy that can help manage antecedents. Not all
antecedents can be prevented by modifying the environment, but this can be an effective strategy
for certain types of antecedents. For example, if a child frequently engages in the behavior of
hitting classmates when they play a frustrating game, an environmental strategy could be to
reduce access to that game. 
Some more examples of environmental modiﬁcation include: 
Removing uncomfortable stimuli
Changing seating arrangements
Ensuring tasks are level-appropriate (not too easy or too difficult)
Clarifying expectations
Modifying demands
Increasing adult support during challenging tasks
Discussing changing in routine beforehand, whenever possible
An important thing to note about the difference between punishment and reinforcement is that
something may not function as you may have intended. Sometimes, consequences that are
intended to punish behavior may actually be reinforcing such as sending a student out of the
classroom for a challenging behavior during a test. What determines whether something is
punishing or reinforcing is if it increases or decreases the behavior; always be mindful to
consider observational and other data to ensure you are achieving effective outcomes. 
Now that you've reviewed the ABCs of behavior and different ways of reinforcing or diminishing
(i.e., punishing) behaviors, you can more effectively implement the gardening tools that allow
mental wellbeing and the subsequent positive behaviors to thrive. You are going to review using
the ABCs to analyze behavior before going over Functional Behavioral Analysis and Behavioral
Intervention Plans. 
Analyzing Your ABCs 

Watch the video below to review ABC data collection.
Take a minute and examine the charts below to see what ABC data
collection may look like. There are many forms that could be used for
collecting ABC data this is just one example  This version has
information included, but you can also download a blank version for
use in your school. Your district may also have forms for you to use.
Example ABC Data Collection worksheet
Blank ABC Sheet.png
108.7 KB
Let's move now from understanding and analyzing behavior to
practically putting that knowledge to use through Functional
Behavioral Assessments.
Functional Behavioral Assessment 

Before deciding which therapeutic practice or behavior management
strategy you would like to use, it is important to analyze why these
behaviors may be happening. Always remember that behavior is
predictable but changeable. If you identify the function of behaviors,
and use effective interventions, you can help students gain skills and
mindsets to change behaviors. As discussed in our "Inclusive
Treatment Planning" lesson, Functional Behavioral Assessments
(FBAs) are a tool to understand the functions of (or reasons for)
behaviors. These assessments indicate the behaviors that are
occurring (i.e., what they look and sound like), when and where they
happen, and how frequently. Then, this information is used to
determine the root causes of the behavior.
Gardening tools
FBAs are one method of gathering information about behavior and responding to it, but they are
not the only ones  Teams can often identify a student s triggers, generate a hypothesis about
the behavior rooted in observation, and make a plan with the student s educators or school-
based practitioner without going through the entire FBA process.
However, given the role FBAs have within the school setting, reviewing them is a worthwhile
process as you expand your gardening toolbox.
There are 7 steps to an FBA, and you can click through
the tabs below to learn more about each step
Step 1: Define 
Deﬁning the Target Behavior 

The ﬁrst step focuses on understanding and describing the behavior, with the goal of answering
the question: what does this behavior look like? You can deﬁne the target behavior among the
team, utilizing educator and staff observation and pre-existing data from past incidents or
overall school history. Deﬁning the target behavior is typically done in the meeting when an FBA
is ﬁrst proposed. Later on in the FBA process, if needed, interviews with students and
families/caregivers can be conducted.   When you are deﬁning the behavior, it is important to be
as speciﬁc and objective as possible. For example, instead of deﬁning the behavior as being angry
or resentful, stick to objective and measurable behaviors (e.g., high pitch screams, kicking
tables).
Step 2: Gather Information 
What Sequence of Events Predicts the Behavior? 

The second step involves understanding the sequence of the behavior, answering the question:
what sequence of events reliably predicts the behavior? 
What happens before, during, and after the behavior?
When does the behavior occur is it a certain time of day? 
Who is around the child when it happens does the behavior only occur with a particular
person? 
Where does the behavior occur is it a speciﬁc place, such as in the gym or cafeteria? A
particular class or subject? Structured or unstructured environments?
Looking at the circumstances behind the behavior and noticing patterns can help you identify
why the behavior may be occurring. At this stage, it is important to be as data-driven as possible.
Remember, data-driven decision-making is a core value of Multi-Tiered System of Supports
(MTSS)
Step 3: Hypothesize 
Generate a Hypothesis Statement 

At this step, based on the deﬁned target behavior and gathered information, develop a hypothesis
that describes the function of the behavior, or the reason you think the target behavior occurs.
The goal question here is: why is this behavior happening? For example, a hypothesis for a
student might sound like this:  When Bob's teacher gives him independent work, he will start
screaming loudly and kicking the doors in order to get attention  (summarizing the function). 
There are several common functions of behavior to consider: 
Attention: to get any attention or acknowledgment from another person, whether that be
caretakers, family, friends, teachers, or peers. Remember, this can include both positive and
negative attention. 
Escape: to avoid an undesired task, situation, or person. In a school setting, students may
want to avoid certain classes or academic assignments. 
Sensory Needs: to experience something pleasant or to avoid something unpleasant. For
example, a student with an autism spectrum disorder may self-stimulate through rocking
or hand ﬂapping. Another student might cover their ears because something is too loud. 
Access: to get something desired (e.g., games, toys, food, etc.). For example, a student
might complete their classwork because the teacher is giving everyone free time on the
computer when they are done
Step 4: Competing Pathways 
Building a Competing Behavior Pathway 

In this step, you can use your hypothesis and information about the behavior to determine how to
best address it. The goal here is to build an effective plan with speciﬁc components that promote
positive behaviors and reduce problem behaviors. One way to do this is with a competing
pathway: replacing a problem behavior with a more positive one. For example, we know that Bob
has been screaming loudly because he would like to receive the teacher's attention: a behavior
pathway could look like Screams    Attention. To support positive behavior, we can teach Bob to
raise his hand for attention instead. Then, the pathway becomes Raises hand    Attention.
Another helpful way to build a competing behavior pathway is to pair the undesired or less
preferred activity with a more desired or preferred activity. When a student knows that by
completing their homework while in class (i.e., less preferred activity) will lead to being able to
chat with friends or leave class (i.e., more preferred activity), they are more likely to do the less
desired activity  This is called the Premack Principle, and you can learn more about it at the
following link: https://besdc.com/premack-principle-a-tool-to-help-your-kids-to-start-or-
ﬁnish-an-activity/
Step 5: Plan BIP 
Design a Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP) 

In this step, the goal is to develop a plan for behavior management strategies. Behavior
Intervention Plans (BIPs) use the results of FBAs to create a plan for supporting positive behavior.
In these plans, you can include two types of strategies: preventive and function/consequence. 
Preventive strategies include steps to make the problem behavior irrelevant: for example, if a
student leaves their desk frequently when a class assignment is too easy, then teachers can
increase the difficulty of that assignment. 
Function/Consequence strategies include steps to make the behavior ineffective. For example, if
a student is screaming to get attention, not responding to the scream while responding to raised
hands or requests for attention can make the screaming less effective and less desirable. Teams
often develop more comprehensive prevention strategies to stop problem behaviors before they
start and build opportunities for students to experience success.
Step 6: Implement BIP 
Plan for Implementation of the BIP 

This step involves a plan for implementing the BIP. For example, which behaviors will the student
replace, and what new skills does the student need to be able to replace the problem behaviors?
This is an important stage of the BIP process because team members need to understand how the
plan will look in real life. In addition, teachers typically implement the bulk of the plan, with
support from school mental health staff, administrators, or other educators. For example, if our
plan is to increase the difficulty of a student's work to decrease boredom, teachers will need to
implement this, so it is important they are a part of the MTSS team and assist in developing the
BIP. Team meetings can help facilitate this stage  Family members will also need to know how
they can support the plan at home. For example, some families choose to offer rewards at home
to reinforce positive behaviors at school. 
Step 7: Monitor BIP 
BIP Monitoring & Modiﬁcation 

This step involves strategies for monitoring, next steps, and creating action plans of the BIP that
you have developed. Once a BIP is developed, teams usually set a timeline for taking data and
reconvening to review progress. Again, this is a great place to be as data-informed as possible
Use progress monitoring to check in to see how the plan is going. What is going well? What might
not be effective, and how could it be modiﬁed? This will help ensure that improving behavior
continues to be supported over time.
Although the basics of FBAs and BIPs were brieﬂy covered, it is
important to acknowledge that many students presenting with Tier 3
needs may have already had an FBA when their needs were not as
signiﬁcant (e.g., Tier 2 needs). As the school-based mental health
practitioner, you may already have insight into the motivators of the
challenging behavior. Your treatment plan may incorporate an
existing BIP focused on preventive strategies to modify the problem
behavior. However, if new problem behaviors arise, it is best practice
to conduct a new FBA and develop a corresponding BIP, if needed.
Whether the intervention is built on an existing or a new BIP, the
plan should speciﬁcally summarize and answer the following
questions:
FBA Questions on a Checklist
While FBAs often result in BIPs, this is not always the case. Instead, changes to
Individual Education Program (IEPs), 504 accommodations, and classroom behavior
plans are other responses to an FBA.
Person surrounded by heart, brain, text bubble
As mentioned in earlier lessons, family involvement is also very
important  Mental health struggles that affect behavior not only
impacts students  school performance, but they also inﬂuence
students  relationships with others, especially their
parents/caregivers.
Knowing the great impact of family/caregiver involvement in
therapies, you recognize the importance of interacting with
parents/caregivers to understand the function of their student s
behavior. In therapeutic practices, it may not be enough to teach
skills and strategies to overcome adversity for improved wellbeing
and mental health these skills and strategies may not be effective
without family input. Therefore, you should also teach
parents/caregivers evidence-based skills.
Following a plan for responding to pre-deﬁned behaviors can also be
used at home to foster strong child-parent/caregiver relationships in
a safe and stable home environment. When parents/caregivers know
how to appropriately respond to the child s challenging behavior,
they are more likely to prevent the occurrence of this behavior and
guide the child in making better decisions. Successfully supporting
behavioral changes is more likely when every parent/caregiver is
involved. This means that every e ort should be made to involve
family members when teaching behavioral skills.
For example, you can teach parents about positive reinforcement,
what you reviewed earlier  Positive reinforcement is one of the
strongest motivating operations to have positive behavior repeated.
When parents/caregivers follow a behavior with praise or reward, the
student is more likely to repeat the positive behavior. Over time,
positive reinforcement will encourage positive behavior change.
Mother showing daughter vegetables
Download the document below for more behavior
management strategies that you can share with families
and caregivers and use in the classroom as well.
Positive Solutions for Families.pdf
237.9 KB
For a deeper dive into the FBA and BIP process,
download the PBIS Center's guide below and sample
FBA and BIP templates.
Tier 3 Brief Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA) Guide.pdf
1.1 MB
FunctionalBehaviorAssessment.docx
25.1 KB
Behavior-Intervention-Plan-form.docx
40.2 KB
After this  , you will examine various effective practices to expand your
gardening toolbox. First, you ll start with understanding the different approaches to mental
health interventions by reviewing the difference between manual and modular-based
approaches. 
Intervention Approaches & Implementation 

Reviewing the Foundation of Tier 3 Supports in Detail
Tier 3 supports are as diverse as the different types of plants one can grow in a garden  You may
be familiar with several evidenced-based therapeutic practices but the needs you address and
the services you provide in a private or clinical mental health setting can look very different
from those same needs and services within the district, the school, and the classroom. Knowing
what support is best served where and when is much like gardening.
Diverse ﬂowers
You may prefer planting and growing perennials like the daylily, a ﬂower that blooms every year.
You may want to experiment with different plants in each season, like tomatoes in the summer
and squash in the fall. Growing herbs may be more your speed compared to planting an orchard.
Alongside what you want to plant, you must consider your climate, soil, and capabilities. This
lesson is here to help you discern what supports are best cultivated within your speciﬁc context
First, you will review modular and manual-based approaches to Tier 3 interventions, and then
you ll review evidence-based practices speciﬁcally before ﬁnishing the lesson out with a special
look at telemental health. Let's go
Manual Approaches to Mental Health 

Approaching mental health interventions by using a manual as a guide is what makes an
intervention a  manual approach . Manuals allow for consistency, standardization, and are
rooted in empirical evidence.
Book in ﬂowers
Imagine the manual approach to a mental health intervention as a highly speciﬁc gardening
guide that provides insight on what to plant when, how many seeds to put in each hole in the
ground, how often to water, and how much growth should be seen each week. 
When deﬁning the role of treatment manuals in training and clinical settings, most clinicians
and researchers agree that treatment manuals are an essential piece of evidence-based therapy.
But how does this approach translate to the school setting?
Watch this video to learn more about manual
approaches to treatment, with a focus on school
settings
As you learned in the video, using manuals when approaching treatment came out of a desire to
ﬁght inconsistencies in treatment and provide more routine care. Examples of manual
approaches are the Coping Cat for depression and anxiety or When Children Refuse: A Cognitive
Behavior Approach for behavior and aggression.
School-based mental health practitioners are responding to
the full range of presenting child and adolescent psychological
disorders. Intervention manuals provide them with the
necessary structure and guidelines to address diverse
treatment targets with proven methods. 
The use of manuals in mental health interventions can help a clinician avoid bias for or against a
particular therapy, provides clarity against a backdrop of many types of therapy, and holds
practitioners to higher professional standards. They are also helpful in training clinicians and
building their conﬁdence (Wilson, 1996). However, treatment manuals do not come without a
fair share of challenges. When you use a manual for treatment, you may ﬁnd that (Marshall,
2009): 
The standardization of manuals impedes ﬂexibility in the session
The manuals are not all-encompassing of the unique idiosyncrasies of a student
Manuals become a "crutch" or a block in the session
Within schools speciﬁcally, administering manual-based mental health interventions can be
difficult due to (Lyon et al., 2013):
Lack of parental or caregiver engagement with the intervention
Barriers to transportation and timing (e.g., operating strictly within school hours)
Inadequate resources available to purchase manuals and train clinicians in a manual
Lack of support from administrators and educators
Because of this, a modular approach to mental health intervention has been suggested as it may
prove more effective in the school setting. Let's take a look now  
Modular Approaches 

Modularity refers to breaking down more complex activities into smaller pieces that may
function independently. In other words, there are  modules  that connect but do not rely on
each other in order to be functional.
The modular approach consists of a guided combination of individually scripted techniques that
are explicitly matched to the child's individual strengths and needs.
Content modules contain information related to therapeutic activities like procedural
descriptions in a treatment manual (Chorpita et al., 2005). However, because the  modules  can
operate on their own in any order, the modular approach can be more ﬂexible than a manual-
based one. Whereas a clinician would need to follow each step in a manual s procedural
guideline, they can use the modules to ﬂex around their student s need or circumstances more
organically. 
The modular design offers numerous potential advantages in terms of design efficiency and
effectiveness all while maintaining efficacy: results from a yearlong evidenced-based modular
approach among school practitioners show that the modular approach may ﬁt well within the
school mental health context (Lyons et. al., 2017). 
Efficiency refers to the ability of a protocol to be designed or re-designed
with reduced time or cost 
Effectiveness refers to the ability of a protocol to be generalizable or
feasible in real-world contexts (adaptable) 
Efficacy refers to the ability of a protocol to achieve its desired effect or
outcome
The modular approach is designed to be highly individualized. For example, one student may
need a few sessions while another student may need more; or one student may need to have
parents incorporated into the treatment sessions while another student may not. 
Because the modular approach can sound very ﬂuid, Let's look at a few speciﬁc approaches in
more detail to ground our understanding
Modular Approach to Therapy for Children with
Anxiety, Depression, Trauma, and Conduct Disorder 
The Modular Approach to Therapy for Children with Anxiety, Depression, Trauma, and Conduct
Disorder (MATCH-ADTC) is a redesign of evidence-based treatments of some of the most
common childhood mental health challenges. The system has been tested in community
mental health settings and has been found highly effective  MATCH-ADTC provides step-by-
step instructions, scripts, handouts, and more to make clinical work more effective.   
It is a component of the PracticeWise platform, which is a proprietary internet-based tool
providing services that help clinicians and organizations improve the quality of health care for
children and adolescents.
To learn more about PracticeWise, click the link below
to visit their website. 
PracticeWise   Welcome
PracticeWise is dedicated to improving human health and welfare through the
use of evidence and information technology to advance behavioral health care.
PracticeWise strives to apply scientiﬁc principles in all its endeavors and to
pursue research and evaluation to promote continued development of
behavioral health services.
READ MORE PRACTICEWISE 
MATCH-ADTC was developed to address several challenges with implementing manual based
approaches in  real world  settings, including schools. Because most manuals are designed for
single disorders or homogeneous clusters, they may not ﬁt the heterogeneous caseloads and
symptom comorbidity that many school-based practitioners see. 
In contrast, MATCH-ADTC was designed to provide: 
Multi-problem intervention components
Coverage of common forms of comorbidity and co-occurring problems
Strategies to shift in response to ﬂuctuating treatment needs
Finally, MATCH-ADTC builds upon techniques found in a range of manuals. Therefore, learning
this system may be an efficient way for clinicians to expand their skills and reduce their need
for multiple trainings in various manual-based approaches    
If you are interested in MATCH-ADTC Online, you can
visit the attached link for a demonstration
PracticeWise
Bruce F. Chorpita, Ph.D. University of California, Los Angeles John R. Weisz,
Ph.D., ABPP Harvard University and Judge Baker Children's Center This
demonstration site provides you an opportunity to review the basic functioning
of the full MATCH-ADTC site.
READ MORE PRACTICEWISE 
Another part of PracticeWise, the Managing and Adapting Practice (MAP) system is designed to
build evidence-informed treatment through the application of a variety of professional
development supports and clinical tools. Major components of MAP include:
A computerized PracticeWise database of evidence-based services that contains
information therapists use to select treatment modules that have the strongest
evidence for being helpful for a particular presenting problem
A set of easy-to-use practice guides for each treatment module with step-by-step
instructions for implementing the key elements
A dashboard tracking system to monitor the use of treatment elements and track a
student s clinical course using standardized and ideographic measures 
The MAP Professional Development Program which structures training and support
for organization and delivery
A therapist portfolio, including records of learning and direct service goals and
performance standards for MAP trainees
Check out other modular approaches by clicking
through the tabs below
UNIFIED PROTOCOL FOR TRANSDIAGNOSTIC TREATMENT OF DIAGNOSTIC DISORDERS 

The Uniﬁed Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders was developed by
David Barlow and a team of researchers at the Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders (CARD) at
Boston University. This protocol is a form of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) that is primarily
used with adults with anxiety, depression, and related disorders; however, this modular approach
has also been developed for children and adolescents, particularly in the areas of how parent-
child relational problems and the family unit impact the child s emotional experiences.
Visit the Uniﬁed Protocol website to subscribe and receive the most up-to-date information on
this treatment.
BUILDING CONFIDENCE 

Building Conﬁdence is a modular cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) program for children with
anxiety disorders. The format consists of individual child therapy, combined with parent training
and involvement.
To read more information and peer-reviewed research on the Building Conﬁdence program
follow this link.
MINDFULNESS MATTERS PROGRAM 

The Mindfulness Matters Program is an adaptable, modular approach to teaching mindfulness to
children and teenagers (Semple & Willard, 2019). It is designed to be implemented in a variety of
settings, including schools. With the purchase of the book, online resources are available for
download, including printable handouts. 
Here is a link to the book s publisher if you are interested: https://www.guilford.com/books/The-
Mindfulness-Matters-Program-for-Children-and-Adolescents/Semple-
Willard/9781462539307
With this knowledge of manual vs. modular approaches, you could understandably be asking,
Which one? . Let's ﬁgure that out next
Picking the Best Intervention for You 

Picking an intervention for a client, let alone for a school or district, can be difficult  Within a
school setting, you and your school team need to identify the intended population's baseline
severity, risk factors, and existing problems as well as district resources and supports to adapt
the most effective treatment approaches. That s a lot but don't worry. There are resources that
can guide you in this process
As beneﬁcial as school-based psychological
interventions may be, it can be challenging for school
psychologists and other school personnel to select the
most appropriate ones, and to adapt them to the realities
of the school environment.
Dennis J Simon, Clinical & School Psychologist
Planning Realistic Implementation and Maintenance by
Educators (PRIME) 

PPRIME is a guide on how to select an evidenced based intervention. It was developed by the
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. This prerequisite guide outlines a
simple, four-step process for selecting evidence-based interventions to address speciﬁc
student concerns.
1
2
3
4
Identify the issue of concern, collect baseline data, and develop goals.
Search the Internet, books, and primary resources for interventions.
Consider beneﬁts and disadvantages of intervention options.
Select an appropriate evidence-based intervention.
Download the PDF below for the complete PRIME guide.
PRIME_quickguide_edvidence-based_intervention.pdf
271 KB
The book School Centered Interventions: Evidence-Based Strategies for Social, Emotional, and
Academic Success by Dennis J Simon presents a practical framework for delivering school-
centered interventions that effectively target the most common psychological, social, and
learning problems experienced by children and adolescents from externalizing and
internalizing disorders to the challenges posed by ADHD and autism spectrum disorders.
...School-centered therapy is the most effective format for addressing social,
emotional, and behavioral issues for children and adolescents.
-  Dennis J. Simon, Clinical & School Psychologist
For each symptom proﬁle, the author examines the diagnostic and developmental
considerations, the empirically supported intervention strategies, instructional supports, crisis
intervention protocols, and required family and systemic supports.  The ﬁrst part of the book
showcases the value of mental health work in schools while the second part covers up-to-date
mental health interventions.
We've provided a link to the book's publisher below
School-Centered Interventions: Evidence-Based
Strategies for Social, Emotional, and Academic Success
(Applying Psychology in the Schools)
This book presents a practical framework for delivering therapeutic and
instructional interventions in schools. Readers will learn how to select
evidence-based interventions and make appropriate adaptations for the school
context. School is where therapeutic services for children and adolescents are
most commonly delivered.
READ MORE INDIECOMMERCE 
Here is a link to a PDF of the book's introduction as well.
Loading
When deciding between manual or modular interventions, remind yourself that regardless of
what ﬁt is best for your school, you re still picking an empirically based intervention that can
support students in their journey to being happier, healthier people.
Effective Interventions for Tier 3 Supports 

The Supports You're Growing
In this section, you ll review different therapeutic strategies you can implement at the Tier 3
level.
Think of it like browsing your local nursery. Each plant is unique, serves a different purpose, and
ultimately adds to its environment
Before you review speciﬁc Tier 3 supports, we at the SBHA want to remind you, ultimately, what
you re doing: you are promoting resiliency among your students through these Tier 3
interventions. Let's focus on that concept in a little more detail now.
Resiliency 

Below are three videos from Harvard University on
what resilience is, the science behind it, and how it can
be built
Multiple deﬁnitions of resilience were mentioned throughout all three videos, but they all boil
down to this: resilience is the ability to maintain balance between the challenging and
rewarding experiences life throws at you. While resiliency starts in genetics, it grows and molds
based on experiences especially through primary relationships of care and love. As you recall
from the video, those relationships ideally include family but are not limited to one s caregivers
or siblings.
You can be one of the people that builds resiliency among students by
your care for them.
Promoting resiliency may sound like a nebulous, intangible task, but it is really what you re
already doing as a supportive adult working with youth. You are teaching students to recognize
and name their emotions, to problem solve difficult relational conﬂicts, and to think through
long-term plans and goals and how their current actions align with them. We at the SBHA are
so thankful for the work you re already doing
With this  big picture  perspective on what you re doing in mind, Let's examine a variety of
EBTs, many of which you may already be familiar with  If you are, think of this as a brief review.
Evidence-Based Therapeutic Interventions 
Click through the tabs to review EBTs
Introduction
As you click through the arrows, think through your own students and what needs they
have  You may just ﬁnd inspiration for new supports to plant at your school
EBT 1
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) 

Cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT, is a widely used effective practice to treat
mental health needs including depression, anxiety, PTSD, and stress. It comes in
manual (e.g.,  standard ) or modular forms, with manual CBT being more formalized
while modular CBT is more ﬂexible. CBT looks at students  feelings, thoughts, and
behaviors and works to understand how all these interact with one another. It helps
clients to change or adapt the their thought patterns that lead to maladaptive
behaviors and feelings. In a CBT intervention with the student, you would identify
behaviors that are causing problems and set goals to focus on more helpful thoughts.
CBT is effective in school settings because it helps students develop strategies to
solve problems, regulate emotions, and engage in desired behavior. You can even
suggest CBT worksheets to teachers for use in their classrooms.
EBT 2
Trauma-Focused CBT (TF-CBT) 

Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, or TFCBT, addresses mental health
needs of clients who are impacted by trauma. The goal is to help clients to not only
deal with negative thoughts, feelings, and behaviors but to feel safe and stabilized
while processing their trauma experience. During TFCBT sessions you help the
student learn skills to manage and tolerate difficult emotions like fear and worry. You
empower their voices by modeling that talking about what happened actually lowers
the emotions when remembering the trauma experience or being reminded of the
trauma experience, and ultimately assist your client in gaining perspective about the
trauma experience which helps to put it into the past.
EBT 3
Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) 

Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) focuses on improving the quality of the
parent-child relationship and changing parent-child patterns to promote a healthy
family relationship. Overall, PCIT aims to reduce negative behavior and interactions
by enhancing child and parent or caregiver attachment. Caregivers are deeply
integrated in the treatment with their child in PCIT.  As the practitioner, you act as a
coach for the caregiver, helping them to adopt additional skills in an experiential
learning environment to support reduction of maladaptive behaviors, and increase
relational connectedness with their children.
EBT 4
Functional Family Therapy (FFT) 

Functional Family Therapy (FFT) is a short-term therapy that is used to treat
externalizing behaviors, substance use, truancy, and delinquency behaviors in youth
aged 11 to 18. A FFT intervention includes the adolescent and their parents or
caregivers. During the intervention, together, you would focus on a change in the
family. It teaches behavioral change skills so that youth can make more thoughtful
choices in the future.  Typically, FFT goes through ﬁve phases: engagement (i.e.,
building trust with the family), motivation (i.e., encouraging the family s belief that
change is possible), relational assessment (i.e., analyzing family interactions and
functions), behavior change (i.e., reducing ineffective behaviors through skill
development), and generalization (i.e., expanding behavioral improvements to
multiple settings).
EBT 5
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) 

Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) helps to treat depression, anxiety, and eating
disorders by  exploring and improving students  interpersonal relationships and
social functioning. IPT s root principle is that psychological phenomena or
symptoms , like depression, are a response to interpersonal dysfunction. Thus, IPT
focuses on current issues rather than reviewing childhood or past dilemmas. IPT
typically focuses on one of four common challenges: relational conﬂict, life changes,
grief and loss, and issues start or maintaining relationships. As the practitioner, you
would help the student create a log of their most important relationships, also known
as an interpersonal inventory, and then grouping their relationship in the
aforementioned problem areas. You would then help the student develop solutions to
the problems and implement them in real life.
EBT 6
Emotion Focused Therapy (EFT) 

Emotion Focused Therapy (EFT) is effective for the treatment of depression, anxiety,
and post-traumatic stress. In EFT interventions, you will be working with students on
how to express and explore their emotions. Understanding emotions enables students
to be aware of when to follow adaptive emotions, how to attend to maladaptive
emotions, and how to self-regulate when emotional states become too much to
handle in the moment. EFT helps clients to recognize that they can tolerate, and not
avoid, difficult emotional states. EFT considers the understanding, awareness, and
acceptance of emotion as central to lasting client change.
EBT 7
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) 

Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) is an action-oriented practice. In this
therapeutic practice, you would assist students in reducing or eliminating avoidance,
denial, and struggles related to emotional states. You are teaching them the skills to
accept these emotions while guiding them forward with their lives. ACT is generally
used to treat anxiety, depression, stress, and substance use. Mindfulness is a key part
of ACT, and you will review it in greater depth later in this lesson
EBT 8
Dialectical Behavior Therapy 

Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) was originally developed to treat more complex
disorders, speciﬁcally Borderline Personality Disorder, and those at high risk of
suicide. Over the years, DBT progressed as an effective treatment for treat other
disorders including, but not limited to, behavioral disorders related to emotion
dysregulation, binge eating, and depression. DBT is designed to help clients build a
meaningful life based on their personal values. Traditional DBT includes individual
therapy, psychoeducational skills coaching, and group therapy. DBT is valuable in the
school setting as a mechanism to teach coping, communication, and emotional
regulation skills which align with broader social, emotional, and behavioral skills
taught in academic settings.
EBT 9
Solution-Focused Brief Therapy (SFBT) 

Solution-Focused Brief Therapy (SFBT) is a short term focused therapeutic approach.
SFBT has a strong emphasis on empowerment and change. SFBT focuses on solutions,
rather than problems. It is helpful in the areas of behavioral and emotional issues,
social skills, academic outcomes, and dropout prevention. SFBT traditionally includes
3 components for interacting with students over a limited period:
1.  Start a conversation around the student s problems or concerns.
1. Have conversations on co-constructing (i.e., working together to create) new
meanings for the student s presenting concerns. 
1. Help student to co-construct a vision to overcome the identiﬁed problems and
concerns.
This process involves creating a detailed image of what the student s life will look like
without the problem, exploring past attempts at solving the problem, and identifying
goals with the student that allow them to align their next steps with their overarching
values
Summary
Well done
Phew  That is a lot of information. don't stress about trying to remember it all we've created a
downloadable PDF that recaps everything, as well as two other resources that both review
therapies based on need
Download the PDF below for a recap of the EBTs you
just read about and click the link for a "menu" of EBTs
based on need
Summary of Therapies.pdf
264.3 KB
Blue Menu of Evidence-Based Interventions
PracticeWise is dedicated to improving human health and welfare through the
use of evidence and information technology to advance behavioral health care.
PracticeWise strives to apply scientiﬁc principles in all its endeavors and to
pursue research and evaluation to promote continued development of
behavioral health services.
READ MORE PRACTICEWISE 
If you would like to know more about each individual
therapy, click through the image below and follow their
links
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)
More resources on CBT can be found in this link
CBT worksheets to use in their classrooms
Solution-Focused Brief Therapy (SFBT)
For a deeper dive, visit this link
Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (TFCBT)
Resources and workbooks on TFCBT can be found in this link
Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT)
Visit  PCIT for more information
Functional Family Therapy (FFT)
Visit FFT more information
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT)
For a deeper dive, visit IPT
Emotion Focused Therapy (EFT)
More resources and EFT training information can be found here
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT)
To learn more about the application of ACT, please visit this link
Modular Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
For more about modular CBT, check out these tools
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT)
For more information on DBT training, please check out this link.
If you want to, feel free to take a break before we move into Motivational Interviewing and
mindfulness as two other Tier 3 supports you can grow
Motivational Interviewing 

Motivational Interviewing (MI) supports change in behavior/action that is usually the most
difficult to modify by helping students ﬁnd the internal motivation to change their behavior  MI
was originally developed to help people su ering from substance use, but it is also used to treat
social, emotional, and behavioral difficulties.
You, as the practitioner, guide students in committing to change. Empathy is at the core of MI.
By being empathetic, you can engage with students in conversations about behavior that lead to
lasting change. 
When using MI with students, understanding the student s values is key to setting clear goals
and working towards them.
Here is an activity you can use with your students to
help them clearly identify and de ne their values  
Value Card Sort Exercise
READ MORE OHSU 
To guide changes in behavior, MI uses the OARS technique:
Open-Ended Questions:  these are your classic  Who, Why, What, When, Where
type questions that require more than a simple  yes  or  no  response from the
student. 
affirmation: You are acknowledging the student s difficulties and their hard work
to overcome them with speciﬁc positive phrases (e.g.,  You worked very hard on
your paper for English II and did so well ) compared to general praise (e.g.,  Good
job ). 
Reﬂection: This is also known as reﬂective listening, which you learned about in
our  Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance  lesson
Summarizing: When you summarize what a student has said, you repeat what the
student told you back to them in your own words, ensuring that you both are on the
same page.
Download this PDF for more information on OARS and
MI
OARS in Motivational Interviewing.pdf
132.1 KB
Mifican be used in a variety of contexts, and can be used to help students work through the next
support: mindfulness
Mindfulness 

The purpose of mindfulness is to develop a perspective on one s consciousness and identity
that can lead to a better mental state and peace. Not only that, but mindfulness is also
tremendously helpful in reducing depression, stress, anxiety, and pain (Carsley et al., 2018;
Hilton et al., 2017; Kallapiran et al., 2015; Spijkerman et al., 2016).
You can consider mindfulness as a therapeutic practice similar to CBT or FFT. When we are
talking about mindfulness, we are not only referring to an intervention focused on stress
management skills. Under a bigger umbrella, it is an intervention that focuses on the mind and
body connection. For example, it includes working with students on their nutrition, exercise,
sleep, stress management, and screen time reduction. That s why mindfulness is also a
fantastic tool for everyone, not just students in need of Tier 3 supports  
Mindfulness is a way of befriending ourselves and our
experience.
Jon Kabat-Zinn, founder of Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction Clinic & Professor emeritus at the
University of Massachusetts Medical School
Mindfulness helps students improve their mental health focus and self-awareness. The two key
components of mindfulness are awareness and acceptance. 
affirmation: Having the ability to focus attention on the present moment.
Acceptance: Being able to stay in the moment/present and accept what is going on,
rather than worrying about  what if  scenarios, digging into the past, or worrying
about the future.
Mindfulness is not the absence of any thoughts or feelings; instead, it is
the acceptance of them.
In therapeutic practices, using mindfulness techniques teaches students how to engage in the
present moment and escape from negative thoughts that cause students to feel anxious,
stressed, or depressed. You can see how it works in the scenario below
Tara scenario
Mindfulness is one of the best practices to use in situations like
Tara's.
Practicing mindfulness will direct her attention away from stress and negative thoughts and
allow her to focus on the present moment. By being mindful of the present, whether through
using her ﬁve senses or focusing on breathing, Tara can pull her mind out of the future worries
about college and school and out of the past frustrations with her mom to just the here and now.
Once present, Tara can more adeptly break down her to-do list with calm and a healthier level of
stress rather than sheer panic. 
Mindfulness, overall, will help students like Tara to support their mental health by learning to
focus attention on the present moment.     
Mindfulness Practices 

One of the beneﬁts of mindfulness is that it can be practiced anywhere, anytime. Nowadays,
even our phones can send us a notiﬁcation to practice mindfulness for at least a minute a day  
Let's  ip through the cards below to remember some
simple ways that you can include mindfulness in your
day
Taking a Mindful Walk 

Whether in a beautiful garden,
your living room, or on your
route from your car to the
grocery store, you can practice
mindfulness by simply focusing
on the experiencing of walking:
how your feet feel on the
ground, the muscle movements
that allow you to keep your
balance, the sounds around
Self-Acceptance 

A key part of mindfulness is
avoiding judgements or labels
on how one thinks or feels. You
can practice mindfulness by
paying attention to your
thoughts; if you notice an
adverb or adjective (e.g.,
good ,  bad ,  waste of time ,
stupid ,  the best ) being
attached to how you are feeling
The Five Senses 

This is a popular mindfulness
exercise, and if you try it, you
will quickly see why  The Five
Senses exercise can be
practiced in virtually any
scenario. For this exercise, you
can verbally or mentally
acknowledge  ve things you
can see, four things you can
feel, three things you can hear,
There are plenty of mindfulness resources you can use in your own life and that you can help
students implement in theirs. We ve attached a few below
Click through the resources below
HEADSPACE
Meditation and Sleep Made Simple - Headspace
Live a healthier, happier, more well-rested life in just a few minutes a day with
the Headspace app.
READ MORE HEADSPACE 
3 Free Mindfulness Tools
Download These 3 Mindfulness Tools (PDF, normally $27) For Free This Week.
100% Science-Based. Used By Professionals.
READ MORE POSITIVEPSYCHOLOGY.COM 
32 Mindfulness Activities to Help You Find Calm at Any
Age
Only have 5 minutes? Try these mindfulness activities when you're cooking,
walking, hanging with the kids, and more.
READ MORE HEALTHLINE 
51 Mindfulness Exercises for Kids in the Classroom -
Waterford.org
Use these 51 mindfulness activities to help children recognize and manage their
thoughts, emotions, and actions-all important SEL skills.
READ MORE WATERFORD.ORG 
Mindfulness is not a one-step solution. It takes practice
Tips for Therapeutic Treatments 

Additional Considerations
We just described multiple therapeutic practices to meet the varying mental health needs of
students. Given what you have learned, is it possible to ﬁnd one therapy that can meet the needs
of every student?
The answer is  No,  one size does not ﬁt all. Every student is different, and each student s
needs vary based on their experiences and background. This means that if a particular therapy is
effective for Jessica, the same therapy may not be effective for Kendra. There are also
considerations of how developmentally appropriate each therapeutic strategy/practice is for a
student. Therapy for a 6th grader can be vastly different than one for an 11th grader  
Click through the scenario below to see how individual
differences matter when providing effective therapies. 
Scenario Presentation:
Qian is a 10-year-old boy in the third grade who has had difficulty making and
keeping friends since ﬁrst grade. Recently his attendance at school has become
problematic.
Step 1
Student Referral: 

Qian s teacher requested assistance from the school psychologist (SP) because she
noticed that Qian displayed signs of anxiety and stress, and his attendance and
learning outcomes were becoming low. The school psychologist contacted Qian s
parents who also conﬁrmed Qian s depression and unwillingness to go to school.
Step 2
Assessment: 

Qian and his parents were interviewed separately. Qian explained that he feels anxious
when he tries to join a group of peers at recess. He also feels shy and afraid to initiate
conversations with individual peers, because he is worried that others will make fun
of him. He wants to make and keep friends.
Step 3
Treatment: 

The SP decided to use cognitive behavioral therapy. This way, Qian would be able to
identify his thoughts and feelings and learn to replace negative thoughts with
positive ones and display the results in his behavior. The SP used action ﬁgures to help
with role play.
Summary
The SP conducted a thorough assessment of Qian s concerns through interviews with
Qian and his parents. CBT has proven to be effective across a wide variety of
demographics and helpful in effectively addressing anxiety and depression in children
and youth.  Given Qian s age, she chose role playing with toys to keep Qian engaged in
addressing his thought and feelings.
Keeping therapies age-appropriate and matched to the student s needs is the ﬁrst step in
delivering effective Tier 3 supports, but they aren t the only ones.
Relationships in Effective Therapeutic Practices 

You may remember from our "Cultivating the Therapeutic Alliance" lesson where we
emphasized the importance of empathy, strong bonds, and positive relationships with
students, that the core component of effective therapeutic practices is the positive relationship
you develop with your student. it's also, as you learned earlier, key to promoting resiliency  
As we mentioned in previous lessons, this positive relationship is fundamental to the youth s
overall well-being. This means that for us and our students to get the most out of therapeutic
practices, we must start with bonding and forming a relationship. In some cases, we may
already have this relationship. If so, we need to look for ways to enhance this relationship so
that students can trust us and feel safe and empowered to talk about their problems. 
Carl Rogers
Carl Rogers, one of the primary founders of  humanistic psychology, once suggested that six
conditions must exist for constructive personality change to happenthrough strong
relationships.
Consider these six conditions by  ipping through these
ashcards
Psychological Contact
The practitioner and student
are in agreed upon contact.
The Student
The student is anxious,
distressed, and vulnerable.
The Practitioner The practitioner is congruent,
genuine, and real. 
Unconditional Positive Regard
The practitioner has acceptance
and support for the student,
regardless of what they do or say.
Communicating Empathy The practitioner communicates the
empathy and unconditional positive
regard they have for the student.
Receiving Empathy
The student perceives the
unconditional positive regard and
empathy being communicated by
the practitioner.
In the chapter on therapeutic relationships in The Heart and Soul of Change: What Works in
Therapy, Alexandra Bachelor and Adam Horvath stated (p.163): 
At its core, the therapeutic relationship remains an intensely
human, personal, and essentially unique encounter.
Additional Tips for Effective Therapeutic Interventions 

In the classrooms, educators set clear expectations, provide guidance, and operate with healthy
boundaries. This classroom culture improves student capacity to learn, engage, and feel safe.
We have great news for you
These same strategies can and should be applied to the therapeutic relationship  For many
students, this may be their ﬁrst time engaging in a therapeutic relationship so providing them
with structure and guidance will increase their investment in their role. Let's look at some of the
best expectations you can set with your students
Expectations for therapy
Another great idea is to have a conversation with your client/student about what else they would
like to have and the expectations they have of you. What a great way to build a safe and
supportive relationship
With these tips in mind, Let's move on to look at a unique yet pivotal method of delivering
mental health interventions telemental health services  
Telemental Health Strategies 

Growing Your Plants Even From Afar
Telemental Health (TMH) is a term you may be familiar with, or it may represent a new concept.
TMH is mental health support from a distance  It is basically providing mental health services
through online platforms, such as video calls and phone calls. Social workers, counselors,
clinicians, and psychologists can all provide TMH. Having a counseling session with a student
over the phone or a live video group online, such as a family session, are some examples of
TMH.
In the previous lessons, you learned that some students may have limited access to mental
health services. Indeed, having limited access to mental health care may lead to youth going
untreated for their mental health needs. We know that compared to their counterparts, youth
with untreated mental health needs have lower academic performance. The National Alliance on
Mental Illness (NAMI) suggests that approximately 50% of students with emotional and
behavioral difficulties are more likely to drop out of school. TMH can be a valuable tool in
increasing access to care for these students.
Before you get started, reflect on your experience with 
TMH in school settings. Using the scale below, rate how
comfortable you feel about using TMH in your school (0
being lowest, 10 being highest).
If you re learning towards the 0-6 range, great  This lesson will provide you with a lot of helpful
information  If your school is new to TMH, it may be overwhelming at ﬁrst. You, other
professionals in your school, or parents may not know or understand this service and may have
many questions. By the end of this lesson, we at the SBHA hope that your comfort level
increases  We are here to provide any support. If you have any questions, please chat with us on
our community of practice platform.
If you re in the 7-10 range wonderful  You are already feeling comfortable with TMH  In this
lesson, you may already know some information, while some information may be novel to you
(please check this out)  You could also be a great resource for your peers by answering their
questions in our community of practice platform.
What Does Telemental Health Look Like? 

As you may already know and can see from the picture above, a mental health practitioner is in
one location and the student is in a different location. For practitioners like you, these locations
could be your homes, schools, or offices/clinics. While students also have the option to choose
their location (whether their homes or schools), studies show that the ideal location for
students to receive TMH services is in their schools. This is because some students may not
have connectivity or devices in their homes. Not only that but also, in general, youth are 6 times
more likely to complete mental health treatments in their schools compared to community
settings  
Sometimes, receiving a service at home creates conﬁdentiality issues when their families are
around. Some students may not have a private place to receive a service and express their needs.
Given these concerns, schools  abilities to provide technology and privacy make it especially
important to have school-based TMH.
When TMH services are offered in school settings, students have greater access to mental
health care providers. Having increased access to mental health providers translates into
students  increased chances of getting help for their mental health needs. As you may
remember from the prior lessons, mental health needs are one of the largest unmet health care
needs in the US. 
School-based TMH increases access to care, thereby addressing students  mental health needs
As a result, students can focus on learning
TMH helps you bring every student to the same table.
To review more bene ts of TMH in school settings, click
through the  ashcards below
Access to care 

Students have more access to care
As we mentioned in "All Hands on
Deck,  mental health statistics,
especially from when COVID had
just started, show many students
bene tted from TMH.
Convenience 

To receive a service, students do
not have to travel to the provider. It
also helps families who may have
limited transportation to travel to
the provider.
Students Like It 

Some students avoid seeking help
because of the stigma. TMH
provides the same private and
con dential services as in-person
therapy. Plus, youth are very
technology savvy.
Psychological Safety 

Studies show that when students
are in their familiar environments,
they have a greater feeling of
psychological safety. Leaving the
safety of school to go to a different
place can make some students feel
uncomfortable.
Satisfaction 

Research shows that students feel
highly satis ed with TMH services
(Hilty et al., 2013).
Rapport 

It may seem challenging to build
connections with students from
a distance. In the previous card,
however, we saw that students
were highly satis ed with their
TMH services. Rapport building
online is possible in many of the
same ways as face-to-facet
interactions: asking open-
Although you've just reviewed the beneﬁts of TMH, it is important to remember that TMH still
may not be the best ﬁt for some students. For example, you ll need to consider students
physical needs and developmental stage. Some students just aren t old enough to sit still in
front a screen for a long period of time with concentration  Other students may be experiencing
psychological concerns, such as suicidal ideation or self-injury, that are best addressed in
person. It is important to assess the level of risk and overall ﬁt before deciding to use TMH with
students
You just learned that students feel satisﬁed with TMH, and some prefer it when compared to in-
person services. As a mental health provider, what are your thoughts on TMH? If you re still
unsure or nervous, don't worry. In the next section, you will review certain TMH strategies in
more detail  These strategies will help you to feel more conﬁdent in providing TMH services if
you decide to do so
Different Telemental Health Strategies 

Cultivating Your Garden in different Ways
To review different TMH strategies, click through the
tabs below  
Selecting a Platform 

When deciding on which platform to use, it is helpful to use one that is cost-effective, easy to use,
and provides technical assistance as needed. You may have already experienced access problems
that are more due to complex platforms that do not provide any assistance other than internet
access. As a quick reminder- when choosing the right platform, please make sure it is compliant
with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).   
Preparing for Your Session 

As with all treatment sessions, have your plan for the session thought out. If there are any
materials or tools that you plan to share, have them handy. For a TMH session, you may want to
send information or a homework sheet via email prior to the session. When you are prepared for
a session, students perceive your conﬁdence which in turn makes them feel safe and comfortable.
Choosing a Location 

Choose a location that is private and free from distractions. If you deliver the service from your
home, and there may be sounds in the background (e.g., dog barking), let your students know.
This way, they know what is going on ahead of time and can feel more comfortable. TMH is
provided best in an environment that ensures privacy.
Using Online Tools and Resources 

One way to keep your students engaged during therapy is to use online resources. A variety of
online games and activities are available for TMH. We gathered some great online resources for
you. Please check links below the tabs to guide you in creating some engaging activities for your
students.
Establishing Online Rapport 

Online sessions may feel intimidating. If it is your ﬁrst time meeting a student, it may be helpful
to provide your student with a quick tour of your space. This way, the student may feel more
comfortable.
Building Online Relationships 

Since you are delivering your service online, remember to use nonverbal gestures, such as virtual
thumbs-ups or high-ﬁves to strengthen communication and build relationships.
Click on the links below for online resources and tools
you can use in TMH
Mad Libs
You can use this game to break the ice with younger students in TMH
We Do Listen
This resource hosts videos and lessons on topics ranging from dealing with bullying, learning to listen, and
telling the truth.
TMH Resources from MUSC
Find resources such as assessment ratings scales, PDFs for trauma narration via TMH, and more here.
you've looked at tips on getting started with TMH and tips on how to be comfortable in those
sessions. Here s another general component that is key: eye contact
Click through the arrows below and look at the images
of different providers  
You can see the mental health
provider looking at a different
place. Even though the provider
may be looking at the computer
This is an example of a serious
screen, it seems like they are
facial expression. It looks
working on something else on their
intimidating, doesn t it? When
screen.
students see you with serious
or intimidating facial
expressions, they may not feel
comfortable and may avoid
forming a relationship with you
and expressing how they feel.
Although using a camera may
We see the mental health provider
smiling, showing attention to the
student, and at the perfect
level/distance for eye contact.
With these overarching pieces of advice in mind, Let's look at guidance for each step of a TMH
session: starting, during, and concluding.
Click through the tabs below
STARTING T H E SESSION 

Starting with an online icebreaker may help you begin to build trust and therapeutic alliance.
Orient your student to TMH by explaining how the session will work.
Make your student feel comfortable by touring your space. Ask the student to do the same.
This way they may feel that you two are in the same room.
We recommend you determine signals between your student and you.  For example, agree
on a signal to stop, just in case someone they do not feel comfortable with happens to walk
into their room. They can use this signal to indicate they need to stop or take a break.
DURING THE SESSION 

Remember the signals you identiﬁed before the session and pay attention to those during the
session.
If your student is distracted during the session, rather than continuing, you may want to stop
and ask,  What s going on?" or "Is everything okay?
You may experience technical difficulties during your session. If so, let your student know
that you may stop for a couple of minutes to address the issue.
CONCLUDING THE SESSION 

Ask the student how they felt about the session: was there anything that the student liked or
didn t like and would they like anything to improve for the next session?
Before ending your session, make sure to plan the next one
Always end your session with a positive activity or statement praise what your student did
well. This is a good place to apply strengths-based language  This will allow them to ﬁnish
the lesson positively and look forward to the next session with an optimistic mindset.
Telemental Health Considerations 

Thus far, we have discussed the positives of TMH. It is also important to acknowledge some of
the concerns. We will now introduce you to some of the concerns with TMH. 
Click on the cards below to learn about some concerns
surrounding school-based TMH. As you explore these
concerns, consider potential solutions.
Confidentiality/Privacy 
 Students may not know if there
is someone else listening to
them. This raises concerns
about con dentiality and
privacy, which may lead them to
be hesitant to talk and share. At
the beginning of the session, it
is always important to remind
the students that their session
is not being recorded and that
Access to Internet 

If your school has limited or
unstable internet connections, it
may not be possible to provide
TMH services.
Technology Issues 
 Although having technology is a
great convenience, at times, it
may be dif cult to work with.
Having technological
dif culties may impact the
quality of service and the way
service is provided and
received. Therefore, we
recommend you use platforms
that have tech support and are
Competence with Technology 

Some providers may not be
familiar with using technology
in their sessions. Technology
issues can make us feel like we
do not know what we are doing.
Being uncomfortable with
technology might impact the
effectiveness of the session or
intervention. In those cases,
reach out to your tech support
These considerations are not  full stops  to implementing TMH in your school or practice. As
with every aspect of therapeutic interventions, challenges will occur. What matters is the
appropriateness, effectiveness, and relational component of the intervention, and the same is
true for TMH
Guidelines for Telemental Health 

When providing TMH, it is important to review guidelines and to stay up to date on the newly
emerging and best TMH practices. Some of these guidelines are provided by the State. There are
also other resources you can use  In the boxes below, we included several resources where you
can ﬁnd these guidelines
Telemental Health Resources
Resource 1
American Telemedicine Association (ATA)
ATA is committed to advance telehealth by increasing access to safe, a ordable, and
appropriate care in different networks including school settings.
https://www.americantelemed.org/
Resource 2
American Psychological Association (APA)
You may already be familiar with APA. It is the largest organization for psychologists.
APA s purpose is to advance knowledge of psychology to improve individuals
wellbeing.
apa.org
Resource 3
American Psychiatric Association
Largest psychiatric organization in the world  Its goal is to increase access to quality
of care by guiding clinicians with diagnostic manuals for mental health disorders. 
psychiatry.org
Resource 4
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP)
AACAP aims to support youth and adolescents for their mentally healthy
development. 
aacap.org
Resource 5
MUSC Center for Telehealth & SC Telehealth Alliance
MUSC Center for Telehealth and SC Telehealth Alliance (SCTA) are organizations in
South Carolina (SC) that provide access to care for students in their schools in SC.
Overall, the goals of these organizations are to improve the access to health care for
youth and adolescents in SC school settings. In 2019, SCTA won the American
Telemedicine Association's President's Award for its commitment to statewide
collaboration. Knowing that SC was recognized as a leader in telehealth gives us lots
of hope for reaching our goals of providing equal care and increasing access for every
student.
https://telehealthfortrauma.com/
We hope that you learned helpful information about school-based TMH. With access to care
being one of the common barriers to treatment, TMH is a viable option. Understanding the
beneﬁts of TMH and learning strategies to overcome barriers will strengthen treatment
opportunities for our students.
Before you move on to the summary, reﬂect one more time on your comfort with TMH in your
school. Use the same scale as before
If you are still in the 0-6 range, it's totally okay, don't be overwhelmed  If learning didn't occur
as expected, it may be a good idea to revisit this lesson and deeper dive to the resources
provided. Always remember that we are here to provide any support. If you have any questions,
please chat with us on our community of practice platform. 
If you are in the 7-10 range, great news  We are glad that you are now feeling comfortable with
using school TMH  With your school TMH knowledge and comfort, you could also be a great
resource for your peers by answering their questions in our community of practice platform. 
Let's review the lesson.
School-based mental health interventions support academic, social, interpersonal,
and behavioral outcomes for students, their families, and school faculty and sta
Understanding the ABCs of behavior, whether observationally or more technically
through an FBA, allows you to better match intervention to student need.
Manual-based approaches to mental health interventions are known for their
consistency and conﬁdence building while modular mental health interventions
more easily adapt to the individualities of each student and situation. 
Relationships with caring adults like yourself can promote resiliency in students,
which is the ability to balance the difficulties and the successes of life.
There are as many evidence-based mental health interventions as there are plants
in a garden, from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) to Solution Focused Brief
Therapy (SFBT) to ACT (Acceptance and Commitment Therapy) what matters is
that the intervention is developmentally appropriate, evidence-based, and matches
student and practitioner preferences and experiences. 
Implementing telemental health (TMH) sessions in a school setting meets the
needs and preferences of many students and practitioners, as well as provides a
ﬂexible option for life circumstances. 
Progress Monitoring for Practitioners in Schools



@@@@@
NEXT LESSON
Lesson 2 of 2
Progress Monitoring for Practitioners in Schools
Outcomes: 

1. Understand the importance of progress monitoring for mental health interventions at
Tier 3 
2. Illustrate how practitioners can use progress monitoring to encourage better student
outcomes
3. Discuss data-informed decision making and its role in the progress monitoring of
mental health interventions
4. Identify various types of measurements commonly used in progress monitoring and
understand how to access and utilize them
Progress Monitoring in Schools
Comprehensive Progress Monitoring in the Multi-Tiered System of
Supports (MTSS) 

Progress monitoring is a process to track and assess a student's academic and behavioral
progress over time. It involves the regular collection and analysis of data to determine whether a
student is making expected progress or if they require additional support or adjustments to
their plan. It is simply a way to ensure that student progress is being measured and monitored.
When done well, progress monitoring not only shows how the student is progressing on
identiﬁed intervention goals but also offers opportunities to make needed changes to assist in
furthering progress.
Progress monitoring is a key component of the Multi-Tiered System of Supports (MTSS), and it
ﬁts within each tier of MTSS. Across each level of MTSS, progress monitoring:
Assesses student performance
Highlights student strengths along with identiﬁed needs
Provides feedback for any needed improvement in interventions
Focuses on the ﬁdelity of implementation with considerations for cultural and
linguistic diversity
Progress Monitoring at Tier 3 

This lesson will focus on progress monitoring of behavioral health goals with students who
have identiﬁed signiﬁcant social, emotional, behavioral, or mental health needs requiring
intensive Tier 3 services. 
As a component of Tier 3 services, school mental health practitioners create treatment plans.
Treatment plans include attention to needs, strengths, and outcomes and involve setting goals
for students. As mentioned in Inclusive Treatment Planning, an effective way to ensure that the
goals are both meaningful and measurable is by using SMARTIE goals.
This lesson will focus on progress monitoring of behavioral health goals with students who
have identiﬁed signiﬁcant social, emotional, behavioral, or mental health needs requiring
intensive Tier 3 services. 
As a component of Tier 3 services, school mental health practitioners create treatment plans.
Treatment plans include attention to needs, strengths, and outcomes and involve setting goals
for students. As mentioned in Inclusive Treatment Planning, an effective way to ensure that the
goals are both meaningful and measurable is by using SMARTIE goals.
Let's refresh your memory on SMARTIE goals and
understand why each component is relevant to progress
monitoring. To review, click on each component.
Specific 

When setting a goal, it is important to be precise about what you want to achieve with the student. Specific
goals provide clarity to both you and the student, making it easier to understand what success looks like.
For example, instead of setting a vague goal like "improve behavior," a specific goal could be "reduce
instances of disruptive behavior during classroom instruction."
Measurable 

Goals should be quantifiable, allowing you to track progress over time. Measurable goals help to answer
questions like "How much progress has been made?" or "How close is the student to reaching the desired
outcome?" This aspect is particularly critical when it comes to progress monitoring because it enables us
to collect data and evidence to assess how well interventions are working.
Attainable 

Goals should be realistic and attainable based on the student's current abilities and circumstances. Always
be mindful to set goals that challenge the student but are not so far out of reach that they become
demotivating. Achievable goals foster a sense of accomplishment, which is essential for maintaining
motivation during Tier 3 interventions.
Relevant 

Goals should directly align with the student's needs, strengths, and desired outcomes. The relevance of a
goal ensures that the efforts put into achieving it will have a meaningful impact on the student. 
Time-bound 

Goals should have a specific timeframe within which they are to be achieved. This timeframe creates a
sense of urgency and helps you to establish milestones for tracking progress and evaluate the effectiveness
of interventions within a reasonable period.
Inclusive 

Inclusive goals consider the perspectives and input of all relevant stakeholders, including the student,
parents, teachers, and other professionals involved in the student's care. Involving everyone in the goal-
setting process promotes collaboration and a shared commitment to the student's success.
Equitable 

Equitable goals recognize the unique needs, backgrounds, and circumstances of each student. They ensure
that the interventions and support provided are fair and just, addressing any disparities or inequalities that
may exist among students with Tier 3 needs. An equitable approach promotes equal access to
opportunities and resources, fostering a more inclusive and supportive learning environment. 
What Does Progress Monitoring of Mental Health
Interventions Involve?
Progress monitoring and your treatment plan goals go hand-in-hand. They help both the
practitioner and the student, including their family, see where progress is occurring and where
adjustments are needed.
As discussed in the last lesson, not every student will have the same response to a particular
intervention, even for the same identiﬁed need. Monitoring a student s symptoms over time is
one of the best ways to know whether a particular therapeutic practice is working or not.
The main components of progress monitoring include: 
Selecting targets that are meaningful to the student
Monitoring more than just symptoms
Providing feedback to the student and student s family
Evolving, changing, or ending intervention based on progress monitoring results
and success or setbacks
Let's look brie y at each of these components. 
Identifying Targets 

The ﬁrst main component to progress monitoring mental health interventions is selecting
targets that are meaningful to the student. Flip the cards below to get an idea of what this
means and how to incorporate it into progress monitoring with your students.
Selecting Targets: 

Collaboratively selecting
targets that are meaningful to
the student and their family is
important in ensuring
successful behavior change
outcomes.
Using Measurements: 

Using measurements to identify
problem areas and then
intermittently reapplying the
measurement to monitor
progress, in companion with
observational data, helps the
provider to evolve, change, or
continue the intervention to
accurately work toward
meeting identi ed goals and
Variety: 

There are various ways a
practitioner may facilitate
target/goal identification. An
example would be to use a
measurement tool to support a
conversation around de ning
targets and then identify key
points throughout the school
year to track and measure the
student s progress using the
Let's practice what you just learned about selecting targets
that are meaningful to the student. Take a moment to orient
yourself to your new student, George. You will connect with
George throughout the next series of activities. Feel free to
grab a pen and paper to take a few case notes
Meet George
An 8th grader, George, has been identiﬁed as needing Tier 3 mental health interventions
based on anger outbursts in the classroom that seem directed at himself, withdrawing and
isolating from peers with whom he was once close, and other behaviors indicating there may
be some serious mood disturbances. These problems appear to be affecting his academic
performance, social skills, and overall well-being at school and at home. You begin meeting
twice a week with George for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). George is unable to
identify why he has developed these feelings and behaviors and is hesitant to share much
during therapy, similar to how he has been behaving in the classroom. 
Reffect on what you just read about George and then
answer the following question before moving to the next
component of progress monitoring. Remember that
there is no one right answer, think deeply and sit with it
for a bit. 
Why is it important to focus on goals that are meaningful for George? 
Here is one way to answer this question.
It is clear to you that George is struggling a great deal. The information you reviewed from
George's "request for assistance" indicates that George is dealing with some symptoms of
depression. You recognize that George is using emotions like anger to cope with underlying
frustrations and/or triggering events. You also note that this is a change from his previous
functioning. You understand the importance of voice and buy-in. 
You know that working on SMARTIE goals collaboratively with George will empower his voice
and further your therapeutic alliance, building key trust and rapport.
Comprehensive Progress Monitoring 

Let's take some time to review the second component of progress monitoring of interventions
monitoring more than just symptoms. Flip the cards below to understand what this means
and how to incorporate it into progress monitoring with your students.
Monitor more than just symptoms: 

It is important to not only
observe, assess, and measure
social, emotional, and
behavioral functioning, but to
also incorporate education
outcomes, attendance,
relationships with peers and
teachers, and more into
progress monitoring. All these
measures will help to accurately
Student Outcomes: 

Student outcomes (e.g.,
attendance, academic
performance) can teach mental
health providers a lot about
how a student is doing outside
of counseling sessions with
them. Without this additional
data, the practitioner is not
seeing the entire picture and
may miss vital steps in the
The Full Picture: 

You can incorporate monitoring
beyond symptoms by
requesting reports or short
assessments from the student s
teachers. It is hard to assess
any health problem without
looking at the full picture. You
already know that practitioners
and teachers are both bogged
down with so much to do, so we
To think about what this looks like in practice, let's reconnect with George.
Many of George s symptoms present as externalizing behaviors. You observe him in therapy
and in the classroom each week and record your ﬁndings. Although George is sharing more
openly in session, thanks to your Temperature Reading activity, you note that there are
additional indicators you would like to track to monitor George's progress.
After reffecting on the paragraph you just read, think
about the following question (Remember, there is not
one correct answer, so get creative ).
How else can you ensure a comprehensive view of George's overall progress? 
Here is one way to answer the question.
You want to ensure that you are attending to both George's more obvious externalizing behaviors
but also his internalizing behaviors and their impact on other areas of George's life. You decide
that you need additional insight from George's teachers related to his behavior, attitude toward
peers, and academic performance. You use an initial, short Strengths and difficulty Questionnaire
(SDQ) paired with brief email check-ins for more qualitative feedback related to George's
frustration tolerance and use of peer support. You also begin bi-weekly calls with George's mom
to discuss behaviors occurring in the home and provide coaching on replacement
behaviors/strategies. You have George's mom complete some Likert-scaled questions to
monitor her perceptions of effectiveness as a support for George's treatment progress. 
Feedback and Quality Improvement 

The third main component to progress monitoring mental health interventions with students
in the school setting is to provide feedback to the student and the student s family. Flip the
cards below to review the reasons this is important
Progress Data Utilization: 

Providing feedback to the student
and their family can increase the
likelihood that progress data is
utilized    
Whole Team Approach: 

It is important for everyone on the
team to know where the student is
in progress and growth and that
includes the student themselves
Ideas to take into School: 

You can create self-reporting
visuals to show students such
as the temperature scale we will
discuss later on in this lesson.
You can also have the student
help input self-reporting data
into notes for progress
monitoring so they have an
understanding of where they
stand in the intervention and
Take a moment to check in with George while considering the role of feedback in
progress monitoring.
You are still meeting with George twice weekly for CBT, observing his behaviors, collecting
classroom assessments from his teacher, and engaging with his mom. You have noticed
from your data that George's externalizing behaviors, speciﬁcally his angry outbursts, have
signiﬁcantly reduced and that his grades are making a turn for the better. George has also
become more comfortable with therapy. He has really taken to the temperature reading and
begins to share his emotional states in more detail. He says he is confused about why he still
feels so "stuck" and shares that he often feels hopeless because nothing seems to be
changing.
After reffecting on George's progress, think about the
following question.
How might you provide feedback to George? 
You are grateful that George feels safe enough in your relationship to express his hopelessness.
You respond empathically to his feelings of hopelessness, inquiring further. You recognize that
George feels like he "is not doing any better" and that his "teachers dislike him." You take a
moment to reframe these thoughts and offer evidence to the contrary. You share with George the
positive qualitative feedback from his teachers/mom, show him the incremental rise in his
grades, and help him review progress in his mood journal. You are authentic with George, sharing
opportunities for continued growth, such as in his peer relationships. George responds positively.
George even wants to discuss new measurable goals for his peer relationships.
You are mindful of George's struggle with hopelessness and bring this issue back to your MTSS
team. Together, you all brainstorm strategies to provide more consistent feedback to George
throughout the school day and at home. 
As George continues to be successful at adapting behavior and thoughts independently, the team
begins to discuss a plan for adjusting the intensity of support while continuing to monitor overall
functioning.
Evolve or Conclude 

Lastly, the fourth main component of progress monitoring at a Tier 3 level is to evolve, change,
or end intervention based on progress monitoring results and successes or setbacks. Flip the
cards below to examine how this looks.
Assess the Need: 

Just because a student bene ts
from Tier 3 mental health
interventions at one point does not
mean that they will necessarily
always need that intervention.
Enhance or End: 

It is sometimes appropriate to
enhance or change the intervention
based on evolving needs of the
student. It is also sometimes
appropriate to end intervention if
your progress monitoring has
consistently shown that the student
exhibits successful behavior
change.
Student Success: 

Student success can be monitored
by reviewing the progress of the
student yourself, with the student,
and with the team in order to
choose the best direction to take for
student success.
Let's reflect on George and decide whether you should evolve, change, or end his
intervention.
As you closely track George's progress over the course of his treatment and collaboration
with teachers and his mother, you notice positive shifts in his behavior, academic
performance, and emotional expression. George has made signiﬁcant strides in reducing his
anger outbursts, improving his grades, and becoming more comfortable sharing his
emotions in treatment.
George has shown significant progress  Lastly,
considering George's progress, think about the following
question.
Given George's progress, what are the next steps for his intervention plan? 
You recognize the importance of evolving the intervention to meet his changing needs. In your
team meetings with the MTSS team, you discuss the possibility of adjusting the intensity of
support. It's clear that George has developed new coping skills and is becoming more self-aware.
He's expressed a desire to work on speciﬁc goals related to his peer relationships.
You and the MTSS team decide to transition from twice-weekly therapy sessions to once-a-
week sessions, allowing George more time to practice his newfound skills independently. You
also decide to involve George more directly in setting his therapy goals, giving him a sense of
ownership over his progress.
The Role of Data-informed Decision Making in
Progress Monitoring 

A Comprehensive Guide to Utilizing Assessments for Individualized
Student Progress
As you know, data-informed decision making and progress monitoring are inextricably linked
in providing effective individualized support for students. Data-informed decision making is the
process of continuously using data to inform services. It is extremely important in the ﬁeld of
school behavioral health to use data as a base for your decisions when it comes to providing
services to students.   
Reﬂect back on what you just learned about the components of progress monitoring. These
components collectively generate crucial data points that serve as the backbone of data-
informed decision making. This means that data-informed decision making is the compass
that guides progress monitoring and conﬁrms that each step is purposeful and responsive to
the unique needs of the student.
Let's review what data can be used for. Data can help you:
Identify needs (i.e., needs assessment)
Tailor interventions to those identiﬁed needs (i.e., goal setting)
Make changes if needs are not being met (i.e., progress monitoring)
The most important aspects of data used to make decisions in progress monitoring are that the
data is consistent, reported frequently, timely, accessible, and built into daily routines. 
Click through the  ashcards below for examples of what
each one looks like as a school practitioner.
For data to be consistent it needs to
come from various knowledgeable
sources about the subject (such as a
self-report, family member, or
educator) and needs to be relevant
to what you are monitoring.
Reporting data frequently is done
by giving the same assessments at
intervals of time to see if change or
progress is being made.
Data should be collected and
recorded in a timely manner that is
relevant to the student and
intervention.
All members of the the team
should be able to see and use
the data
Data can be collected as a part
of daily, weekly, bi-monthly, or
monthly routines. This can look
like a student  lling out a short
self-report of feelings each
morning, a teacher reporting
data once a week on a student,
or a practitioner observing the
student every Tuesday and
Thursday.
Reporting Data
It can be overwhelming to know exactly how to report data, and this may vary by school.
Understanding the mechanism of data reporting is essential for creating effective support
systems. You are now going to explore how data reporting as a practitioner on an MTSS team
typically goes by looking into the who, what, when, and where of data reporting at Tier 3.
WH O ?
WH AT ?
WH E N ?
WH E R E ?
Who reports Tier 3 data and whom is it reported to? 
Well, simply put, you as the practitioner are responsible for reporting it  While students, families,
and educators report data to you, you are responsible for analyzing that data and reporting all Tier
3 data. You may also be wondering who the data is reported to. Data is reported to the students,
family, and MTSS team.
WH O ?
WH AT ?
WH E N ?
WH E R E ?
What happens after data is reported? 
 
Once data is reported, it is continually used in the treatment of the student to address needs and
identify progress. his means that the reported data serves as a foundation for making decisions
regarding the student's ongoing interventions.
Data is also collected to help focus the needs of Tier 3 programs in schools and at the district level.
This means that data reporting is not just for individual student support but also contributes to
broader program planning and improvement e orts.
WH O ?
WH AT ?
WH E N ?
WH E R E ?
When does data reporting take place? 

Data reporting does not have a speciﬁc timeline across the board. It can range depending on the
speciﬁc context and needs of the students. It can occur on a weekly basis with the MTSS team and
students, on a monthly basis with families, and even on a yearly or bi-yearly basis at the district
level. This ﬂexibility in reporting timelines ensures that data is collected and reported in a way
that aligns with the unique needs of each student and the requirements of the school or district.
WH O ?
WH AT ?
WH E N ?
WH E R E ?
Where does data reporting take place? 

Data reporting takes place in MTSS meetings, meetings with students, and meetings with
families. These settings provide opportunities for practitioners and stakeholders to discuss and
act upon the reported data effectively.
Now that you have gained a comprehensive understanding of the roles played by data reporting,
Let's pivot to another critical aspect of the progress monitoring process: measurements. Just as
data reporting provides valuable insights, measurements of a structured way to quantify and
assess various aspects of students' progress. Let's get started
Time to Talk Measurements 

it's no secret that measurements are a huge part of progress monitoring as they give great data
and insight into how the student progresses with the intervention you provide. Measurements
are not just given to students. They are also ﬁlled out by caretakers, teachers, other school staff,
and of course, the practitioner who provides the service. 
Before talking about measurements, Let's remember two critical concepts of measurement for
progress monitoring:
Reliability: Reliability is about the consistency and stability of measurement over
time. In progress monitoring, it ensures that if you measure a student's
performance multiple times, you will get similar results if the student's actual
performance has not changed. Reliability helps identify real changes versus random
ﬂuctuations. 
Validity: is the extent to which a measurement tool or assessment actually
measures what it is intended to measure. In progress monitoring, validity ensures
that the data collected are meaningful and relevant to the educational goals and
objectives set for the student.
Digging in a garden's dirt
In this section, you will review many different measurements used in progress monitoring. You
will learn what they are best used for and why. As these assessments have versions for self,
teacher/educators, and family/caregivers, you may see them more than once.
Before delving into each version of assessments, Let's consider unique advantages and
limitations of each version of assessments: self, teacher/educators, and family/caregivers.
Review the table that describes the advantages and
limitations of assessments. Click to enlarge.
Table describing the advantages and limitations of assessments
Self-Assessments 

Let's start with self-assessments. Click on the assessments below to learn how to use self-
assessments for progress monitoring.
The Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale for Children (CES-DC) 

What is it?
The Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale for Children (CES-DC) is a
student self-report measure to assess depressive symptoms in children, adolescents,
and young adults ages 6-23. 
How is it administered?
20-item assessment given to students to assess depression/mood that takes between
5-10 minutes to complete.
Where is it? 
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Depression Self-Rating Scale for Children (DSRS-C) 

What is it?
The Depression Self Rating Scale for Children (DSRSC) is a measure designed to assess
depression symptoms in children ages 8 to 14 within the past week.
How is it administered?
18-item assessment that can be given to students to assess progress of depression and
mood symptoms that takes 5-10 minutes to complete.
Where is it? 
Learn more about the assessment here.
Child PTSD Symptom Scale (CPSS-SR-5) 

What is it?
Foa s Child PTSD Symptom Scale for DSM-5 (CPSS-5) was developed to screen and
assess the severity of DSM-5 post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in children and
adolescents exposed to trauma. There is a self-report (CPSS-SR-5) version, which
includes an optional trauma screen to identify frightening or stressful events.
How is it administered?
29-item assessment to progress monitor symptoms of trauma and takes about 15
minutes for students to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Identification with School Questionnaire (ISQ) 

What is it?
The Identiﬁcation with School Questionnaire (ISQ) assesses a student s emotional
engagement with school using two subscales. The  Valuing  subscale assesses how
important or useful a student regards learning, to what degree a student agrees that
school is an important institution in society, and how much school is part of the
student s self-deﬁnition. The  Belongingness  subscale assesses the degree to which a
student feels that he or she is a signiﬁcant member of the school community.
How is it administered?
16 item assessment that can be given to students in grades 8-12 to measure value and
belongingness in the school.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Pediatric Symptom Checklist (Y-PSC) 

What is it?
The Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC) is a screening tool intended to identify a wide
range of psychosocial concerns. Full version was developed for youth (Y-PSC).
How is it administered?
35-item (or abbreviated 17-item) assessment that can be given to students to monitor
progress of symptoms such as anxiety, depression, disruptive behavior, global
functioning, hyperactivity, and inattention and takes about 5 minutes to complete
(even less for abbreviated version).
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The School Burnout Inventory (SBI) 

What is it?
The School Burnout Inventory (SBI) assesses three factors associated with school-
related stress among upper middle school and high school students, including
Exhaustion at school, Cynicism toward the meaning of school, and Sense of inadequacy
at school. Exhaustion is related to feelings of strain and chronic fatigue resulting from
overtaxing schoolwork; cynicism is related to having a detached attitude toward
school and school-work; sense of inadequacy is related to diminished feelings of
competence, success, achievement, and efficacy associated with school and
schoolwork.
How is it administered?
3- or 9-item assessment that can be given to students in grades 8-12 to monitor
progress of exhaustion and school burnout that takes 1-5 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED-C) 

What is it?
The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED) assesses symptoms related
to overall anxiety and speciﬁc DSM anxiety disorder criteria. Versions are available for
students ages 8-18 (SCARED-C)
How is it administered?
41-item assessment that can be given to students to monitor progress around anxiety
symptoms and takes 10 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Strengths and Dif culties Questionnaire (SDQ) 
What is it?
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) 

psychological attributes across emotional, behavioral, and social dimensions.
How is it administered?
25-item assessment given to students to monitor the progress of symptoms such as
anxiety, depression, disruptive behavior, global functioning, hyperactivity, and
inattention that takes 5-10 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Student Engagement Instrument (SEI) 

What is it?
The Student Engagement Instrument (SEI) assesses a student's level of engagement at
school and with learning. Speciﬁcally, the SEI measures "higher-inference  types of
student engagement, including cognitive and affective (psychological) engagement.
How is it administered?
33-item (for grades 3-5) or 35-item (for grades 6-12) assessment that monitors
progress of student cognitive and psychological engagement in schools and takes 20-
30 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Students' Life Satisfaction Scale (SLSS) 

What is it?
The Students' Life Satisfaction Scale (SLSS) evaluates self-reported life satisfaction
for students ages 8- 18.
How is it administered?
7-item assessment that can be given to students ages 8-18 to assess for life satisfaction
and social skills and takes less than 5 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
Teacher/Educator and Family/Guardian Assessments 

Click on the assessments below to learn more about each teacher/educator and family/guardian
assessment listed, how to use it for progress monitoring, and to download a copy.
The Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC) 

What is it?
The Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC, revised) allows educators to rate
behaviors and symptoms evidenced by youth diagnosed with Autism Spectrum
Disorders (ASD). In contrast to other measures that diagnose ASD, the ATEC was
designed to measure effectiveness of treatment over time and allows for individual
progress monitoring.
How is it administered?
77-item assessments for teachers to complete for students age 2 and up to report on
behavior progress monitoring around autism symptoms.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Child Mania Rating Scale (CMRS-T & CMRS-P) 

What is it?
The Child Mania Rating Scale, educator/teacher-rated (CMRS-T) assessment assesses
symptoms that reﬂect the characteristics of a manic episode according to DSM-IV
criteria, including symptoms consistent with criterion A (levels of elation/irritability),
B (levels of self-esteem/grandiosity), and C (impairment to functioning). Items for the
measures were developed speciﬁcally for youth and adolescents rather than through
adaptation of an existing adult-oriented rating scale.
How is it administered?
21-item assessment for teachers to complete for students aged 5-17 to progress
monitor depression and mood symptoms and takes 10-15 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) 
 
What is it?
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) assesses positive and negative
psychological attributes across emotional, behavioral, and social dimensions
How is it administered?
25-item assessment that assessment that takes 5-10 minutes for a teacher to
complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Student Risk Screening Scale (SRSS) 

What is it?
The Student Risk Screening Scale (SRSS-E7) helps identify externalizing behaviors
among school-aged students. It was originally developed to detect risk for anti-social
behavior patterns. 
How is it administered?
7-item assessments for teachers to complete for students grades 12-K and takes 15-20
minutes to complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
The Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic Rating Scale 

What is it?
The Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic Rating Scale assesses the presence of DSM-5 criteria
for ADHD Inattentive, Hyperactive/Impulsive, and combined subtypes. The initial
assessment includes screening for common behavioral and emotional comorbidities of
ADHD. A follow-up assessment is available for progress monitoring symptoms and
tracking medication side effects.
How is it administered?
43-item assessments for teachers of students ages 6-12 that takes 10 minutes to
complete.
Where is it?
Learn more about the assessment here.
Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC) 

What is it?
The Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC) is a screening tool intended to identify a wide
range of psychosocial concerns. Full (35-item) and abbreviated (17-item) versions
were developed for youth (Y-PSC) and caregiver (PSC) respondents. An additional
version for caregivers is available in pictorials (PPSC; picture options). Originally
utilized in primary care, the PSC s application has also been expanded to school and
community health and behavioral health settings.
How is it administered?
35-item assessment for caregivers of children ages 3-16 to complete and takes 5
minutes to complete.
Where is it?
You can access the assessment here.
The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED-P) 

What is it?
The Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED) assesses symptoms related
to overall anxiety and speciﬁc DSM anxiety disorder criteria. Caregiver report
(SCARED-P) is available. The measure has been validated in outpatient mental health,
pediatric, community, and school-based samples and shows utility in delineating
anxiety disorders from non-anxiety disorders.
How is it administered?
41-item assessment for caregivers of children ages 8-18 to complete and takes around
10 minutes to complete.
Where is it?
You can access the assessment here.
Choosing the Right Measure 

We hear you  There are lots of measures introduced. You may have questions about how to
select the right one for your speciﬁc needs. Now Let's discuss some of the key practices for
choosing the right measure.
Click on the tabs to review.
ALIGNMENT WITH GOALS 

The ﬁrst consideration in choosing the right measure is to align it with the speciﬁc goals of
progress monitoring. Determine what you want to assess and track. For instance, if you are
focusing on depressive symptoms, assessments like CES-DC or DSRS-C may be suitable for self-
assessment. If you're looking for behavioral concerns, teacher assessments like SDQ could be
valuable.
DEVELOPMENTALLY AWARE 

Consider the age and developmental stage of the student. Younger children may have limited self-
awareness, making caregiver or teacher assessments more reliable. Older students, on the other
hand, can provide meaningful self-assessments. Select measures that are developmentally
appropriate.
CONTEXT 

Think about the context in which the assessment will be administered. School-based assessments
may beneﬁt from educator/teacher assessments, while home-based assessments may rely more
on family/guardian reports. Consider the setting in which the student spends most of their time.
MULTIPLE MEASURES 

To gain a comprehensive understanding of the student's wellbeing, consider using multiple
measure types. Combining self-assessments, teacher assessments, and family assessments can
provide a holistic view, capturing a wider range of experiences and behaviors.
Let's review the lesson.
Progress monitoring is a process for tracking both academic and behavioral
progress in students, playing a key role in the MTSS framework.
Creating SMARTIE goals is important for developing meaningful and measurable
intervention plans for students with Tier 3 mental health needs.
To gain a comprehensive understanding of a student's progress, it is essential to
monitor various aspects beyond symptoms, such as academic performance,
attendance, relationships, and overall wellbeing.
Providing feedback to students and their families based on progress data fosters
collaboration and trust, enhancing the effectiveness of interventions and
supporting students' engagement in the process.
Recognizing when to adapt, change, or conclude intervention plans based on
progress monitoring results is essential for tailoring support to students' evolving
needs and achieving successful outcomes.



*****
Growing Your Tier 3 Supports - 1.4
Welcome to Growing Your Tier 3 Supports  In this course, you will learn about the
interventions, best practices, and implementation of Tier 3 of Multi-tiered System
of Supports (MTSS), with a focus on supporting behavioral and mental health. Like
seeds planted in a garden, growing supports at Tier 3 creates a beautiful garden
where everyone is ﬂourishing. Let's get started
Mental Health Crisis Management


@@@@@ 
Lesson 1 of 1
Mental Health Crisis Management
Outcomes: 

1. Recognize the types of stress and their role in mental health crises
2. Summarize the core elements of suicide prevention and intervention, with an emphasis
on the Multi-Tiered System of Supports
3.  Facilitate suicide screening and collaborative safety planning
Crisis Management
Knowing Ourselves in Midst of Crisis
The mere mention of the word "crisis" tends to stir up strong emotions. Fear, urgency,
concern, and empathy are just a few of the feelings that may arise. The term "crisis" also
prompts a natural instinct to take immediate action to address the situation.
Regardless of the severity or intensity of the crisis, maintaining a composed approach is key to
effectively assisting the individual. While being calm may seem counterintuitive in a crisis
situation, a calm demeanor helps create a safe and reassuring environment. Responsiveness
ensures that appropriate actions are taken promptly and tailored to the speciﬁc needs of the
individual and the situation at hand. It's easier to see what a person or situation needs when you
can remain cool, calm, and collected.
When a person ﬁnds themselves in a crisis, it is often an indication that they are stressed and
require assistance. Their behavior serves as a form of communication, signaling that they are in
distress and need support. 
Addressing crises within a school setting necessitates a collaborative e ort involving educators,
administrators, mental health professionals, students, and often parents. Awareness of
available resources, both within the school and in the broader community, ensures that
appropriate support can be accessed when needed.
In this lesson, we are focusing on crises related speciﬁcally to mental health, with the greatest
potential mental health crisis being suicide. We will start by brieﬂy discussing types of stress
and possible behavioral responses to perceived threats. 
Stress and Its Impact 

We all experience varying degrees of stress in our lives. Individual response to stress reﬂects
our environment, relationships, lived and learned experiences, and the amount of stressors one
is navigating. This is like the analogy of "how full is your cup," or more appropriately in this
context, "how heavy is your backpack?"
Let's take a moment to review the different types of
stress before we look at responses to perceived threats.
Click through the tabs below
Positive Stress 

Positive stress is experienced as the body's normal and healthy response to a tense situation or
event. It promotes adaptability and change. Positive stress is also the type of stress you feel when
you are excited or take on a new challenge
The experience of positive stress can lend itself to the development of a sense of agency, self-
efficacy, and resilience. In this case, stress is predictable, moderate, and controllable.
Think of this like taking a long hike by yourself. It can be tough, exhausting, and it can take a lot
out of you. However, you know you can do it, you've prepared, and are excited for that rush of
endorphins when you ﬁnish.
Tolerable Stress 

Tolerable stress encompasses a heightened activation of the body's systemic response to a
longer-lasting situation or severe event. Tolerable stress is manageable when accompanied by
supportive relationships and strong social and emotional skills and resources.
Think of hiking again. Maybe the hike takes longer than expected, or you twist your ankle.
Thankfully, this time you went with a friend who is there to help you along the way. It sucks, but
you know you'll be okay.
Toxic Stress 

When experiencing toxic stress, the body stays in a heightened state of activation, meaning the
system is ready for "ﬁght, ﬂight, or freeze." The body does not settle down and may ignore
signals about the surrounding environment returning to a safe level.
This sustained activation negatively impacts brain function, making it prone to: 
Anxiety
Depression
Impaired learning and memory
Hypervigilance 
Reduced attention span
Difficulties experiencing joy and connection
Difficulties responding appropriately to non-threatening situations
In this verion of the hiking example, you are alone and lost with no phone signal and it is getting
dark. If positive stress is motivating and tolerable stress is challenging, toxic stress is crushing.
Not all stress is adverse, but prolonged exposure to stress, especially
episodic and unpredictable stress, can have significant negative
mental and physical health outcomes.
It is important to consider that lived experience impacts behavior as well as perceptions of
safety and security. Students with a signiﬁcant history of adverse experiences or high doses of
toxic stress are more likely to respond to daily challenges or moderate stressors more reactively
compared to other students.
As you build relationships and learn about your students, you can consider these stressors. You
see these patterns of behaviors in the narratives they share or within the relational dynamics of
the family system. You may also see how these survival mode behaviors play out during the
school day.
Let's take a moment to review what  ght,  ight, or freeze
might look like in the table below
Table describing example ﬁght, ﬂight, and freeze behaviors
Recognizing Our Own Response 

Now that we recognize that behavior can communicate
dysregulation, what should we consider or do next?
You might be shouting from the rooftops, "Respond to
the behavior ,"   but let's take a calming breath
rst...literally.
You are human too. You've been on the receiving end of some intense
emotional responses. You have lived experiences that inform your
responses as well. You deserve a moment to check in with yourself,
regulate, and then respond. After all, modeling healthy behaviors is
key for student learning.
Once the adults are regulated, it is far more likely that a response
such as teaching a replacement behavior or helping the dysregulated
student identify a more effective response can occur.
If you took the "All Hands on Deck" course, you might recall that the role of a supportive adult is
to be the "calm in the storm." This does not mean that you, or the other adult(s) involved, may
not be navigating some stormy seas as well. As a safe adult, you must give yourself some grace
to return to calmer waters so that a healthier, corrective exchange can blossom. 
Let's take a moment right now to practice a simple regulation
technique.
Feet  at on the ground, quiet mind...
Deep breath in counting 1,  2,  3,  4...
Exhale counting 1, 2, 3, 4...
Repeat 3 times, or until you feel ready to move forward with your
lesson.
Looking Closer at Suicide 

A Mental Health Crisis
We mentioned earlier that suicide is one of the mental health crises that you may encounter. In
this section of this lesson, you will review e orts for identifying and responding to suicidal
crises.
Before you move on, remember: Suicide is about escaping
pain, not death or dying. We treat pain. We manage pain. We
relieve pain.
All of the e orts connected to both the reduction of suicide risk and response to a suicide crisis
are about promoting hope and resiliency. 
Supporting students, families, and communities that have been impacted by suicide is difficult
work. Recognizing that you are not immune to the pain and trauma of these circumstances is
also critical. You must give yourself space and grace to work through your own emotions,
beliefs, and attitudes related to suicide.
It is important to recognize that recovery is not an end state, but a journey. It does not mean that
the individual is no longer living with symptoms of their mental illness. Instead, recovery
means that an individual is stabilized, has effective coping skills and supports, and can
successfully navigate their day.
Suicide is not an easy topic, so please put yourself  rst.  If you feel
you may need some support, please connect to a colleague with a
kind ear, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 988, or text
"HOPE" to 741741 to reach a trained crisis counselor with United
Way's Crisis Text Line.
Take a moment to watch the video of Jordan's Story.
Stories of Hope and Recovery: Jordan's Story
Stories of Hope and Recovery: Jordan's Story
Jordan's story can be hard to hear, yet the intersection of psychiatry and therapy after his
suicide attempt reminds us that our work matters. He also reminds us that suicide is something
anyone can feel the weight of, not just individuals who "look" suicidal. With Jordan's story in
mind, let's move forward
Learning the Language 

The words that we use broadly to discuss suicide can function to reduce stigma. As a source of
support in your building, you have the opportunity to inﬂuence positive change related to
perceptions of suicide. This change starts with the language.
There are phrases that have been used historically that, unbeknownst to many professionals
and community members alike, perpetuate stigma about suicide.   
Let's take a moment to ensure that we are using
language that communicates safety, awareness, and
respect for lived experience.
Survivor 

The term is used for any individual who attempted suicide but is still here with us today. They
navigated a serious mental health crisis and now continue to show strength and perseverance
through their recovery journey.
Loss Survivor 

Any individual who lost a loved one or family member to suicide.
Died by Suicide 

Historically the term "committed suicide" has been used to describe someone ending their life.
The word "commit" has negative associations such as "commit a crime.  A health crisis is not a
crime.
Interrupted Attempt 

This term is used for a suicide attempt where "individuals initiate action to end their lives but are
stopped by someone or something external to the individual before actually carrying out the act."
(Burke et al., 2016)
Aborted Attempt 

This term is used for a suicide attempt where "individuals start to do something to try to end
their lives but stop themselves before actually harming themselves." (Posner, et al., 2011).
Actual Attempt 

This term is used when an individual follows through with their plan to end their life but survives.
Completed 

This term is used to describe actual attempts or loss of life to suicide. The language replaces the
more harmful term "successful."
Keeping this language in mind allows for a more empathetic, less stigmatized conversation
about suicide to be had.
Knowing the Data 

Confronting the prevalence and scope of the impact of suicide through data can be difficult.
Suicide does not discriminate. It is important to note that the data gives a strong representation
of suicide experience but does not reﬂect the true scope of the problem. In other words, the data
is staggering, but it does not capture all that is impacted by suicide.
Take a moment to review the data sets below and reﬂect on how this information might impact
your prevention and intervention supports at each tier of your MTSS.
YOUTH RISK DATA 

Results from the 2019 Youth Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System show that 18.8% (i.e., 1 in
5) of high school students seriously considered attempting suicide, 8.9% (i.e., 1 in 11) actually
attempted suicide, and 2.5% (i.e., 1 in 40) had made a suicide attempt requiring medical
treatment.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) WISQARS Leading Causes of
Death Reports for 2019, the teen suicide rate is higher among: 
Males compared with females. However, females attempt suicide more often than males.
American Indian/Alaska Native adolescents compared with other racial and ethnic groups.
White adolescents have a higher suicide rate compared with Asian/Paciﬁc Islander, Hispanic
and Black adolescents.
Suicide attempts are higher among students who identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual
compared with students who identify as heterosexual.
Suicide is the 12th leading cause of death for youth aged 5-9, the 2nd leading cause of death
for youth aged 10-14, and the 3rd leading cause of death for youth aged 15-24.
SOUTH CAROLINA DATA 

South Carolina has several suicide prevention e orts. Currently, South Carolina has written into
law:
Inclusion of the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline and other crisis lines on student ID
cards
Suicide prevention and mental health training for certain school personnel
Student education on mental health
The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention has additional best-practice considerations for
enhancement in your district:
Student allowances for excused mental health absences
School personnel must report student suicide risk to a parent and/or guardian
Student education in suicide prevention
For more information about suicide in South Carolina, review the graphic below. Click to enlarge. 
NATIONAL DATA 

On a national level, suicide also has a far-reaching impact. According to America s Health
Rankings (2022), the cost of suicide in the United States in 2019 was estimated to be $926 billion
(about $2,800 per person) in medical costs, loss of productivity, and value of statistical life.
The National Institute of Mental Health reports that:
The rates of suicide in 2020 were highest for American Indian, Non-Hispanic males (37.4 per
100,000), followed by White, Non-Hispanic males (27.0 per 100,000). Among females the
rates of suicide were highest for American Indian, Non-Hispanic females (10.8 per 100,000)
and White, Non-Hispanic females (6.9 per 100,000).
In 2020, ﬁrearms were the most common method used in suicide deaths in the United
States, accounting for over half of all suicide deaths (24,292).
To review the full reports cited please click on the following links: Suicidal Ideation and
Behavior Among High School Students , National Institute of Mental Health Suicide
Statistics, Youth Risk Behavior Survey Toolkit, American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
South Carolina, and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Suicide Prevention
Resources.
Understanding the Stigma 

As we discussed throughout the course, stigma is a signiﬁcant barrier to individuals accessing
the types of support that promote wellbeing. There is no greater barrier to ending suicide than
stigma. If you are learning to grow Tier 3 supports to help students through this mental health
crisis, you can view stigma as concrete being poured over fertile soil.
This stigma comes in the form of both social stigma and internalized
stigma and can look like the use of stigmatizing language, negative
attitudes towards particular diagnoses where suicide risk is higher,
and a lack of awareness of treatment and management of suicide
risk.
When we recognize that the prevalence of suicide risk is this
prominent, it certainly makes concerns about the impact of stigma
that much worse. Suicide can occur as an outcome of any mental
health diagnosis, but suicidal ideation and/or behavior has a higher
likelihood of occurrence in certain disorders, speciﬁcally:
Borderline Personality Disorder
Major Depressive Disorder
Bipolar Disorder
Sometimes we may shy away from bringing up discussions of suicide
because there is a lack of conﬁdence associated with our personal
perception of effectiveness. This concern is 100%
understandable. Let's work to remove some of these concerns by
increasing our knowledge about suicide and understanding how we
can engage the resources in the school setting  
Hope is being able to see that there is light despite all the darkness
- Desmond Tutu, Human Rights Activist
Crisis Response Teams 

Team-based Support
Many schools have a relatively solid team in place as a result of existing MTSS e orts. This
group may be a sub-team of the larger MTSS team, identiﬁed as the Crisis Response Team
(CRT). If your team is yet to be deﬁned, then this is a great opportunity to bring voices, hearts,
and expertise to the table.
A multi-disciplinary team should reﬂect the professionals in your school, have representation
from community resources, and include a family voice. When it comes to intervention response
we want to ensure that, if not already represented, school resource ourcers and school nurses
are intentionally included.
Training for team members on mental health and crisis response is key. In addition to the
development and implementation of protocols, it is recommended that this team review school
policies to ensure that language and strategy are in alignment with best practices to reduce
harm and trauma to vulnerable students and promote mental health. 
As one of the core features of the MTSS framework, teaming aligns with best practices in crisis
response and suicide prevention. The framework allows the adults in the system to be proactive
in screening and referring students at risk of suicide ensuring they receive the support needed
to weather the crisis.
Let's watch this video from Jen Freeman, a national
leader in Crisis Response and Recovery, talking about
strategies for crisis response.
Screening 

Comprehensive suicide prevention programming in schools should include the selection and
use of speciﬁc screening for suicide risk. General mental health screening is not the same as
suicide-speciﬁc screening. 
There are universal screening programs that can be implemented as a Tier 1 intervention as well
as targeted screening tools at Tier 2 and Tier 3. Although universal screening is ideal, aiming for
a robust targeted screening and assessment of risk is a more realistic and achievable goal.
There are a number of cost-effective evidence-based screeners and
screening programs available for use in schools. Ultimately the decision
between the use of a program or the use of a tool to inform procedures
will be a key consideration for the CRT and hinges on the availability of
resources and student body needs. 
The following are guiding questions to inform the selection of an
effective tool:
Is it brief?
Is it easy to administer? Can anyone administer it?
Is it valid?
Does it include questions regarding active and passive ideation, suicide plans,
intention to act, and suicide behavior?
Does the line of questioning attend to both current suicide risk and history of
suicidal ideations?
The Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS) is
the leading suicide-specific screening tool.
Review the image below to explore the tool.
Additional training, forms, and resources for the CSSRS
can be found on the Columbia Lighthouse Project
website. Check out the link below for more information.
Community-Card-Teachers-5.pdf
449.8 KB
The Lighthouse Project The Columbia Lighthouse
Project
The Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS), the most evidence-
supported tool of its kind, is a simple series of questions that anyone can use
anywhere in the world to prevent suicide. Get the Questions The C-SSRS can be
used by anyone, anywhere.
READ MORE THE COLUMBIA LIGHTHOUSE PROJECT 
Safety Planning 

An integral step, regardless of the level of risk, is the development of a collaborative safety plan.
As the name implies, this process is facilitated mutually between the supportive adult and the
student, with caregiver input. When a plan is created collaboratively there is more buy-in from
the student and family which increases the likelihood that they will implement the plan when
experiencing distress. 
The safety plan enhances resiliency factors by highlighting internal and external coping
strategies. Additionally, using a plan communicates a belief in the student's capacity to tolerate
and manage discomfort and successfully navigate a crisis. This plan is NOT a contract. It is
ineffective to contract around safety. It is unrealistic for someone to "promise" to not have
thoughts about suicide. Instead, a safety plan helps the person commit to using skills and
strategies if those thoughts or feelings occur.
The Stanley-Brown Safety Plan is an effective tool with
a specific set of coping strategies and resources to assist
in decreasing the risk of suicidal behavior.
Review the image below to explore the tool and
download a copy.
Warning Signs 

The warning signs section of the safety plan indicates moods, thoughts, or events that cause distress.
Examples of warning signs may include: 
Getting into a fight with my parents
Having a bad day at school
Feeling isolated
Making a mistake and feeling worthless
Don't worry if the student is struggling to identify these signs. You can coach them through identification
by using the information they share with you. 
Internal Coping Strategies 

These are the strategies the student can use to self-soothe when warning signs of a crisis are present.
These are the personal resources that can be deployed without the assistance of another person. 
Examples of internal coping strategies: 
Listening to music
Going for a walk
Deep breathing exercises
Reading my favorite book
If the student is struggling to identify coping skills, you might recommend options.
People and Places that Provide Distraction 

The next section of the safety plan is for people and social settings that can provide a distraction from
distressing thoughts or feelings. These people and places aren t necessarily meant specifically to talk over
suicidal thoughts but are a source of positive support. 
Examples of people and places that provide distraction are: 
Friends from school
Siblings
Parents or caregivers
Coffee shops
Parks
Libraries
People To Ask for Help 

This step lists supportive, close relationships that students feel comfortable contacting in a crisis. Unlike
the previous step, people in this step can talk through the difficult and distressing feelings the student is
going through.
Examples of people to ask for help in a crisis are: 
Parents or caregivers
Siblings
Close friends
Teachers
Note: it is totally fine if there is an overlap between Steps 3 and 4
Professionals To Contact 

Professionals to contact are typically mental or behavioral health providers. Examples of professionals to
contact include:
School or private practice counselors
Psychiatrists
Psychologists
Emergency rooms
Suicide prevention lifelines (988)
Making the Environment Safer 

The last step lists ways to modify the environment to make it safer. For students with a suicide plan or
access to means, this includes restricting access to those means. 
Some examples include: 
Having parents lock pills in a cabinet
Removing sharp objects, such as knives or razors, from the environment
Locking guns in a safe
Stanley-Brown-Safety-Plan-8-6-21.pdf
89.4 KB
Additional training, forms, and resources for Safety Planning can be found by clicking the
following link: Stanley-Brown Safety Planning Intervention
Let's review the lesson.
A mental health crisis is any situation in which a person's behavior puts them at
risk of hurting themselves or others and prevents them from being able to care for
themselves effectively. A crisis exists on a continuum of dysregulation.
Many mental health crises may be caused by toxic stress. When experiencing toxic
stress, the body stays in a heightened state of activation, "ﬁght, ﬂight, or freeze."
The body does not settle down and may ignore signals about the surrounding
environment returning to a safe level.
Suicide is one potential mental health crisis that you may encounter. Suicidality
refers to thinking about or being preoccupied with thoughts of suicide. This ranges
from an occasional thought to serious consideration about suicide. Suicide is
the action of ending one's life.
Intervention is anything done to address or lesson a crisis situation. Suicide
intervention is aligned with de-escalating a crisis in the moment, increasing
environmental safety, and preventing attempt behavior that can lead to loss of life.
Prevention e orts come before crisis situations and reduce their likelihood.
effective prevention e orts for schools include positive health and emotional
wellbeing promotion for all and early identiﬁcation of students at risk.
MTSS can support crisis management through its use of teaming. Teaming aligns
with best practices in crisis response and suicide prevention. The MTSS framework
allows the system to be proactive in screening and referring students at risk of
suicide.
Before you go
As a valuable conclusion to this lesson, we have prepared two
comprehensive PDF documents for you  One includes all the
essential links covered throughout this course, and the other
incorporates assets meticulously crafted by our dedicated
SBHA team.
Growing Your Tier 3 Supports Assets Created by the SBHA.pdf
128.2 KB
Growing Your Tier 3 Supports Lesson Links.pdf
187.9 KB
Go ahead and get connected with us on social media: Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook.
The Academy also encourages greater involvement with the broader Southeastern School
Behavioral Health Community to increase connections throughout the Southeast and the
nation. We are all in this together
Congratulations
You have completed the Tier 3 course. Great work
EXIT COURSE
